BUILDING YOUR FIRST CITY .
At the start of the game, your civilization consists of a single band of wandering nomads.
This is a Settlers unit.
Although Settlers are capable of performing a variety of useful tasks, your first task is to move the Settlers unit to a site that is suitable for the construction of your first city.
Finding suitable locations in which to build cities, especially your first city, is one of the most important decisions you make in the game.
In order to survive and grow, each city must have access to all three resource types: food (represented by grain), production (represented by shields), and trade goods (represented by arrows).
The map in Civilization II is divided into individual “squares,” each of which contains a different type of terrain.
Each terrain type yields resources in differing amounts.
A good city site provides all three resource types.
Normally, the lines dividing the map squares are invisible.
To get an idea of how the terrain is divided, turn on the map grid by choosing SHOW MAP GRID from the VIEW menu, or holding down c and pressing G. Before you move your Settlers, take time to examine the surrounding terrain.
You will note that only 21 map squares are visible.
This represents the extent to which your civilization has explored the world.
(This 21-square pattern is significant with regard to cities as well, as you will see later.)
The surrounding black areas represent unexplored terrain.
You can build a city on any terrain square except for Ocean.
As mentioned earlier, each terrain type yields differing proportions of resources, so the type of terrain you choose for a city site determines the level of the city’s success.
Your Settlers currently occupy a Grassland square.
Normally, Grassland produces two grain when worked by one of your citizens.
Note that a small shield symbol appears in the center of this particular Grassland square.
That means that, in addition to its normal resources, this Grassland square also yields one shield when worked.
Normal Grassland squares (without shields) appear to the northwest and northeast of your Settlers.
Directly to the north and directly to the west of the Settlers are Plains squares.
The Plains terrain type produces one grain and one shield when worked by one of your citizens.
Southeast, south, and southwest of the Settlers are Ocean squares, which produce one grain and two arrows each when worked.
Surrounding the edge of the visible terrain are a Plains square with a river running through it, two additional Grassland squares, and four additional Ocean squares.
There are also two Hills squares and a Mountains square along the northwest edge, two Forest squares to the southwest, and an Ocean square two squares to the southeast with a Whale in it.
We’ll look at these in a moment.
You have the option of moving around to find a suitable city site.
If the nearby terrain is less than optimal it is worth doing so, considering the importance of proper city placement.
You shouldn’t waste too much time looking, however.
Settlers move only one square per turn, and 20 years pass every turn this early in the game.
Luckily, your starting position here is excellent: The local terrain provides a diverse resource mix, you are adjacent to a sea coast, and Grassland squares make good city locations.
Build your first city by selecting BUILD NEW CITY from the ORDERS menu, or by pressing the B key.
You can rename the city if you like, but we’ll refer to it as Washington.
EXAMINING THE CITY DISPLAY .
As soon as the city is built, a new window appears.
This window is called the CITY DISPLAY.
The CITY DISPLAY gives detailed information on the city’s current status, including the amount of resources generated, the item currently being built by the city, and the size and attitude of the city’s population.
Your first priority is to check the status of the city’s resources.
The POPULATION ROSTER shows that there is one citizen in Washington, and he is content.
Under most circumstances, each citizen in the city is working in one of the terrain squares surrounding the city, generating resources for the city’s use.
As new citizens are added to the population, the game puts them to work in the terrain square it considers the most productive available.
In this case, the city’s single resident is producing resources in the Ocean square that contains the Whale.
You have the option of moving citizens to different terrain squares if you want to produce different combinations of resources.
As you can see by the icons on the RESOURCE MAP, the Whale square is generating two grain, two shields, and two arrows.
Click the Whale square to “pick up” the citizen working there, then click on the Plains square with the river running through it, directly to the east (right) of the city.
Notice that, in the Plains square with the river, the citizen now generates one grain, one shield, and one arrow.
Click on the Plains square with the river and then click on one of the Forest squares southwest of the city.
In the Forest square, the citizen generates one grain and two shields, but no arrows.
Since the Whale square is one of the most productive types of terrain, click on the Forest square and then on the Whale square to return the citizen to his original position.
As you can see, the combination of resources produced is based on terrain type.
Under normal circumstances, each city can assign citizens to generate resources in any of the 20 terrain squares surrounding the city.
The pattern of 21 squares with the city at the center that is seen in Washington’s RESOURCE MAP is called the CITY RADIUS.
In addition to the terrain squares in the CITY RADIUS, the city square itself always generates resources.
Like the squares worked by your citizens, the number and type of resources produced in the city square is dependent on the terrain type.
Washington is currently generating four units of food.
Each citizen requires two units of food each turn in order to survive.
Excess grain icons accumulate in the FOOD STORAGE BOX.
The more surplus food the city generates, the faster it grows.
Washington is also generating three shields.
Shields represent raw materials used for supporting units and building new items.
Since there are currently no units to support, the shields generated each turn go directly into the PRODUCTION BOX.
Finally, the city is producing three arrows, which represent trade goods.
Trade goods are divided into three separate categories: Taxes (gold icons), Luxuries (goblet icons), and Science (beaker icons).
Currently, one arrow is being used to generate taxes, while the other two are generating science.
Washington’s IMPROVEMENTS ROSTER shows that the only building in the city is the Palace.
Your Palace denotes that Washington is your civilization’s capital.
FIRST PRIORITIES .
Because there is so much information to assimilate at the start of the game, it’s hard to know what you should do first.
There are four priorities that you must keep in mind early in the game: defense, research, growth, and exploration.
Defense: Your top priority is to defend Washington from potential enemies.
After all, who knows who might be lurking in all that unexplored territory?
To defend the city, you must build a military unit.
When the city is built, it automatically begins to construct a defensive unit.
The PRODUCTION BOX shows that Washington is currently producing a Warriors unit.
Research: The science portion of your trade income is used to research new Civilization Advances.
Civilization Advances are new discoveries and technologies that allow you to build newer and better military units, city improvements, and Wonders of the World.
Growth: The surplus food generated by the city eventually leads to population growth.
When the FOOD STORAGE BOX is completely filled with grain, a new citizen is added to the population.
Steady city growth leads to increased productivity and the ability to expand your civilization by building more Settlers to colonize the continent.
Exploration: If you don’t explore the dark areas of the map, you have no way of knowing what benefits and dangers might be lurking there.
By using spare units to explore the world around you, you can discover the villages of minor tribes (which often provide you with benefits such as money and new discoveries), sites for new cities, and neighboring civilizations.
When you’re finished examining Washington, close the CITY DISPLAY by clicking the EXIT button in the lower right corner.
RESEARCHING CIVILIZATION ADVANCES .
After closing the CITY DISPLAY, press the e key to end the turn.
At the start of the next turn, you are prompted to choose the first civilization advance you want to research.
When the game begins, your civilization has only minimal knowledge, usually consisting of only Irrigation, Mining, and Roads.
(In some games you might be given additional advances at the start of the game, but in the tutorial this is not the case.)
The bulk of your knowledge throughout the game is gained through research.
There are many different strategies dictating the order in which advances are researched.
For the purposes of this tutorial, we’ll adopt a conservative, defensive strategy.
You can experiment with research strategies of your own as you become more familiar with the game.
When the menu of possible advances appears, select Bronze Working, then click OK.
We have chosen Bronze Working because the discovery of this advance allows you to build the Phalanx unit.
Phalanxes are twice as effective at defending cities as Warriors.
The amount of time required to research discoveries is based on the amount of science your city is currently generating.
Remember, science is one of the components of trade.
Select the TRADE ADVISOR option from the ADVISORS menu, or press the 5 key.
As you can see from this display, it currently takes five turns to make a new discovery.
The more beaker icons you generate each turn the faster you make new discoveries.
Click OK to close the TRADE ADVISOR window.
As you can see by looking at the STATUS window, 20 years of game time pass.
(On CHIEFTAIN level, turns start out spanning 20 years each.
As the game progresses, the turns get shorter, dropping to ten years per turn, then five, two, and eventually one year per turn.)
The amount of trade allocated to taxes, luxuries, and science can be adjusted to a certain degree to suit your needs.
Select TAX RATE from the KINGDOM menu.
As you can see, there are three sliders in the TAX RATE window, each of which controls the percentage of one of the three elements of trade.
Moving a slider left or right decreases or increases (respectively) the percentage of trade allocated to that element, and adjusts the other elements accordingly so that the total percentage equals 100 percent.
Unlike Civilization and CivNet, Civilization II limits the maximum percentage of trade that can be allocated to taxes, luxuries, and science based on your civilization’s government type.
You start the game in Despotism, so the maximum percentage you can allocate to any trade element is 60 percent.
Note that the game automatically sets science at 60 percent and taxes at 40 percent.
Since your focus should be on research at this time, and you currently require no luxuries to keep your population happy, the default settings are fine for now.
Close the TAX RATE window by clicking the OK button.
MEANWHILE, BACK IN THE CITY...
Now, let’s take a look at what happened in the city after the first turn.
Open Washington’s CITY DISPLAY by clicking the city icon on the map.
Several things have changed since you last looked inside Washington.
First, the information in the TITLE BAR indicates that your treasury now contains 51 gold instead of the original 50.
That is because Washington is generating one gold coin of taxes each turn.
Since there are currently no improvements in Washington that require upkeep, the gold is added to your treasury for future use.
Look at the FOOD STORAGE BOX.
It is no longer empty.
There are now two grain icons in it.
This is the surplus food that was generated by the city on the first turn.
It is stored in the FOOD STORAGE BOX for later use.
Finally, look at the PRODUCTION BOX.
Like the FOOD STORAGE BOX, it is no longer empty.
The three shields generated on the first turn were used to help build the Warriors unit currently under production.
An alternate way to close the CITY DISPLAY is to click on the button in the upper left corner.
Use whichever method you find most comfortable.
YOUR FIRST UNIT .
Until your Warriors unit is completed, you have little to do.
Press the ENTER key three times.
It is now the fourth turn, and you have just built your first military unit.
The Warriors unit is now flashing on and off in the city square.
The unit is now ready to receive orders.
There are two things you can do with your first military unit.
You could use the unit to defend your city.
In most cases, it is unwise to leave a city undefended.
This is especially true if you know that an enemy unit is nearby.
However, early in the game, the world is sparsely populated, so you can take a chance and send the unit out to explore hidden terrain outside the CITY RADIUS.
Move the Warriors unit to the west by pressing the 4 key on the numeric keypad.
Note that one of the black, unexplored terrain squares is revealed when the unit moves.
Most units can “see” one square in any direction.
Your turn ends automatically when your last unit finishes its movement.
Since Warriors can move only one square per turn, your turn is now over.
YOUR FIRST CIVILIZATION ADVANCE .
We’ll go back to exploring the world in a moment.
For now, something more interesting has happened.
At the start of this turn, your scientists announce that they have discovered the secret of Bronze Working.
Congratulations!
You have discovered your first civilization advance.
After the initial message of discovery, the CIVILOPEDIA appears.
The CIVILOPEDIA is an on-line encyclopedia of game facts.
The CIVILOPEDIA screen that appears after the discovery of each advance shows the units, improvements, and Wonders you can now build as a result of the advance, as well as new lines of research available.
Bronze Working allows you to build Phalanx units and the Colossus Wonder, and allows you to research Currency.
Bronze Working also allows you to research Iron Working, but only after you have researched Warrior Code.
Close the CIVILOPEDIA screen by clicking the EXIT button.
Once again the list of research choices appears, allowing you to choose the next advance you want to discover.
Since Bronze Working has provided the ability to build a good defensive unit, you can now move on to a research path that enhances your exploration capability.
Choose Horseback Riding from the menu, and click OK.
CHANGING PRODUCTION .
Before you do anything else, its time to look inside the city again.
Open Washington’s CITY DISPLAY by clicking the city’s icon on the map.
When you look at the PRODUCTION BOX, you’ll notice that the city has automatically begun to build another Warriors unit.
In fact, a city goes on producing unit upon unit until it receives orders to the contrary.
Since the city is still defenseless, you need to build a unit to protect Washington from possible invaders.
A Phalanx is a better defensive unit than Warriors, so that is what you should build.
Click the CHANGE button above the PRODUCTION BOX.
When you do so, a menu listing the possible production options appears.
Choose Phalanx by clicking on it.
Click OK to exit the PRODUCTION menu.
The Phalanx’s icon now appears above the PRODUCTION BOX to indicate that the city is now building a Phalanx.
Click EXIT to close the CITY DISPLAY.
FINDING A MINOR TRIBE .
Remember your Warriors unit?
It’s flashing again, indicating that it is once again ready to move.
Move the Warriors one square to the west by pressing the 4 key on the numeric keypad.
Note that, as the unit moves, any unexplored (black) terrain within one square of the unit is revealed.
Press e to end the turn.
When the unit starts flashing again (indicating that it is the next turn) move it one square to the southwest by pressing the 1 key on the numeric keypad.
Now here’s something interesting!
Your exploration has revealed a “hut,” one square to the southwest of the Warriors’ present position.
This hut is home to a minor tribe.
Minor tribes are not rival civilizations; rather, they are small villages populated with people who might be inclined to help you.
Save your game by choosing the SAVE GAME option from the GAME menu, or by holding down the c key and pressing S. You are about to make contact with the minor tribe.
The results of such contact are random.
You could receive a gift of knowledge or gold; the tribe might band together to form a mercenary military unit and join you; or the tribe might decide to honor you by establishing a new city in your empire.
Of course it is possible that negative events might occur as well: The village could be empty, or populated by hostile Barbarians.
By saving the game prior to contact, you have the option of reloading from the save if you don’t like the results of exploring the village.
When the Warriors start flashing again, move your unit onto the hut.
As stated earlier, one of a number of random events will occur as a result of contacting a minor tribe.
For the purposes of this tutorial, we’ll assume that you receive a gift of gold from the minor tribe.
POPULATION INCREASE .
Continue your exploration for the next three turns.
Move the Warriors back toward Washington, twice to the east, and once north, so you are right next to the city.
On this turn, two things happen simultaneously.
First, Washington completes the Phalanx it was building.
Second, the population of the city increases to two, as indicated by the number next to the city’s icon.
Open Washington’s CITY DISPLAY.
Notice that the FOOD STORAGE BOX has only two food in it now.
Next turn it will start filling up again, accumulating grain for the next population increase.
Notice that the POPULATION ROSTER now contains two citizens.
On the RESOURCE MAP, you can see that the new citizen is already at work generating resources; specifically, the citizen is generating two grain and one shield in one of the Grassland-Shield squares to the north.
That’s fine for now, so leave the citizen there.
As for production, its time to change again.
This early in the game, one defensive unit is more than adequate for city protection.
Click the CHANGE button, and select Settlers from the PRODUCTION menu.
Its time to start thinking about the next priority: growth.
In order to expand your civilization, you need to build other cities; and for that, you need Settlers.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
As noted on the PRODUCTION menu, it will take Washington ten turns to produce a Settlers unit.
You can speed this up a bit through the use of your Warriors unit.
Once the CITY DISPLAY is closed, the Warriors should be flashing.
Move the Warriors unit into the city, and re- open the CITY DISPLAY.
In the center section of the CITY DISPLAY you should see two icons: a Phalanx unit and a Warriors unit.
Click on the Warriors unit icon.
From the menu of options that appears, choose DISBAND and click OK.
Now, look at the PRODUCTION BOX.
Five shields appear as soon as the Warriors unit is disbanded.
When a unit is disbanded inside one of your cities, half of its original cost in shields is added to the production currently in progress.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
Now, back on the map, the Phalanx is flashing.
In order to protect the city, the Phalanx must remain inside Washington.
Units provide the best protection when they are fortified.
Fortify the Phalanx by choosing FORTIFY from the ORDERS menu, or by pressing the F key.
Fortified units remain in their defensive position until you manually reactivate them.
For now, the Phalanx should be left alone to guard Washington.
INTERIM .
Because you have so few units and cities early in the game, there are often periods of time that pass without your having to take any action.
After fortifying your Phalanx, press e two times.
At this point, your wise men discover Horseback Riding.
In addition to allowing the research of several new advances, Horseback Riding allows you to build Horsemen, fast-moving military units that are great for exploration.
Choose Code of Laws as the next advance to research.
For the purposes of this tutorial, our goal now is to develop Trade.
In order to do so, you must research both Code of Laws and Currency.
Code of Laws also leads to Monarchy, a more advanced form of government that helps to increase your productivity.
Continue pressing e .
About six turns later, you are notified that Washington has completed the Settlers it has been building.
Choose the ZOOM TO CITY option on the notification menu to open the CITY DISPLAY.
Once there, change production so that Washington is building a Horsemen unit.
You’ll be using the Horsemen to do some more exploration as soon as it’s built.
You’ll notice that Washington’s population has dropped to one.
That is because Settlers units represent citizens that leave the city in order to improve the surrounding terrain or to establish a new city.
Also, one of the three shields generated by the city is now being used for support.
That is because, under Despotism, any units beyond the size of the city’s population require one shield each turn to support them.
Right now, you have two units, but only one citizen.
At any rate, the FOOD STORAGE BOX shows that the population is about to increase again, so these situations are only temporary.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
EXPANDING YOUR EMPIRE .
Now it’s time to expand your empire.
Move your Settlers directly west until they reach the sea coast, then move them one square to the southwest.
Use the BUILD CITY command on the ORDERS menu, or press B to build a new city.
Again, you can name the city anything you want, but we’ll refer to it by its default name, “New York.”
When New York’s CITY DISPLAY opens, you’ll notice a couple of differences from Washington when it was first built.
Although New York is generating just as much food as Washington did, raw materials and trade goods generation are both significantly lower.
That’s because there are no special resources, like Whales, to take advantage of within New York’s CITY RADIUS at this time.
Which brings us to another oddity: the entire CITY RADIUS of New York is not visible.
That’s because there is still some unexplored terrain nearby.
In order for the city to take advantage of its entire CITY RADIUS, all the terrain therein must be explored.
You’ll have to take care of that as soon as possible; you never know what useful resources might be lurking in the dark.
Notice that New York is currently producing a Phalanx.
Since this city needs to be protected too, a Phalanx is just what you want.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
After a couple of turns pass, the Horsemen unit is completed in Washington.
When the Horsemen unit appears, open Washington’s CITY DISPLAY, and click the CHANGE button.
Since you have enough units for the time being, and you aren’t quite ready to incur the upkeep expense of a Barracks, let’s build your first Wonder of the World.
Choose Colossus from the PRODUCTION menu, and close the CITY DISPLAY.
Meanwhile, let’s go and explore that hidden terrain near New York.
Move your Horsemen west, toward New York.
Notice that Horsemen have twice the movement capability of the other units you’ve used so far.
That’s why they are so good for exploring.
As you move toward New York, your wise men make another discovery: Code of Laws.
When you are offered the choice of what to research next, choose Currency.
On the next two turns, move the Horsemen southwest.
Halfway through the second turn’s movement, the Horsemen should reach the coast just south of New York, revealing several new terrain squares.
One of these is a Whale.
(Remember how productive that was back in Washington?)
Maybe it is inside New York’s CITY RADIUS...
Open New York’s CITY DISPLAY.
The entire CITY RADIUS is now visible; and you’re in luck!
The Whale square is inside the CITY RADIUS.
Click the Grassland square northeast of the city to “pick up” your worker, then click the Whale square to put him to work again.
Note that New York’s resource generation has now significantly increased.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
Move your Horsemen directly east until you reach the Forest on the coast west of Washington.
Notice that your unit only gets to move once when moving into a Forest.
That’s because it takes two movement points to move into Forest squares.
Because of their rugged features, many terrain types require more than one movement point in order to move through them.
Now, move your Horsemen east, past Washington, until you get to the River.
Then, proceed roughly east-southeast, following the coast.
After your Horsemen unit is several squares past Washington, the Phalanx in New York is completed.
Fortify the Phalanx, just as you did in Washington, and change the production in New York to Settlers.
As you continue to explore, your Horsemen might encounter one or two minor tribes.
When you discover Currency select Trade as your next research project.
Save the game again, and enter these villages just as you did the first time you met a minor tribe.
Restart from the saved game if you don’t like the results.
MEETING ANOTHER CIVILIZATION .
If you continue along the coastline as instructed, you eventually meet your nearest neighbors, the Sioux.
Their capital city, Little Bighorn, is located some distance away, on the opposite coast directly southeast of Washington.
As soon as you enter Sioux territory, their leader, Sitting Bull, requests an audience with you.
Accept Sitting Bull’s invitation by clicking OK.
Establishing effective communication with your neighbors is vital to your success.
Early in the game, you should take any reasonable actions to ensure that nearby civilizations enjoy your company.
Not only does this keep your civilization reasonably safe from attack, it can also lead to profitable exchanges of money and information.
You can see your opponent’s attitude toward you when you make contact with one another.
The attitudes of rival leaders are based on your past behavior when dealing with other civilizations.
Since this is your first contact with any civilization, Sitting Bull should have a fairly good attitude when you first meet (“cordial” at the very least).
The most likely result of this encounter is that Sitting Bull will offer to exchange knowledge or sign a peace treaty.
Whatever Sitting Bull offers, accept his proposals.
Notice that each time you agree to his proposals, Sitting Bull’s attitude steadily improves.
This is important, because you want to make friends at this stage in the game.
If Sitting Bull’s attitude is particularly good (“enthusiastic” or “worshipful”), offer to SUGGEST A PERMANENT STRATEGIC ALLIANCE with the Sioux.
A permanent alliance is better than a treaty, because it allows both civilizations to move freely through one another’s territory.
Whether the alliance is accepted or rejected, end the meeting by choosing CONSIDER THIS DISCUSSION COMPLETE and clicking OK.
If the alliance was rejected, move your Horsemen unit away from Little Bighorn as soon as possible to avoid violating the peace treaty.
If you establish a reputation of violating peace treaties, your opponents are less likely to sign agreements and treaties with you in the future.
After this encounter, you have gained a friend (for now), and possibly one or two free civilization advances as a result of technology exchange with the Sioux.
Now that you have made contact, you can chat with Sitting Bull at any time by selecting the FOREIGN MINISTER option from the ADVISORS menu, and sending an emissary to the Sioux.
Sitting Bull can also contact you at any time.
You shouldn’t pester your opponents too frequently, however, because rival leaders quickly grow weary of interruptions.
If you are contacted by the Sioux at any time during the remainder of this tutorial, agree to their demands.
During the tutorial game, you want to keep the Sioux happy so they won’t attack you.
During a real game, use your own judgment as to how to respond to an opponent’s demands.
IMPROVING THE TERRAIN .
Continue exploring with your Horsemen to the northeast of Little Bighorn.
Avoid entering Little Bighorn’s CITY RADIUS, because this will be viewed as a violation of your peace treaty.
After a number of turns, your wise men discover Trade.
Select Ceremonial Burial as your next advance.
If you already have Ceremonial Burial (as a result of knowledge exchanged with the Sioux), select Monarchy.
Several turns later, New York finishes building its Settlers.
Open New York’s CITY DISPLAY and click the CHANGE button.
Notice that there are now several more options on the PRODUCTION menu: the discovery of Code of Laws allows you to build a Courthouse, and the discovery of Trade allows you to build Caravan units.
Select Caravan, and close the CITY DISPLAY.
When the Settlers unit becomes active, move it one square to the northeast of New York (using the 9 key on the numeric keypad), onto the Grassland-Shield square.
For the next couple of turns, keep exploring with the Horsemen, but skip the Settler’s turn by pressing the z.
Continue to do this until New York’s population has increased to two.
When this happens, open New York’s CITY DISPLAY.
When you look at New York’s RESOURCE MAP, you see that the Grassland-Shield square northeast of the city is currently generating one shield and two grain.
That’s not bad, but you can use your Settlers unit to improve the production in that terrain square.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
When the Settlers becomes active, choose BUILD ROAD from the ORDERS menu, or press the R key.
For the next couple of turns, the Settlers unit spends its time building a road.
When the Settlers become active again, you see on the map that there is now a road leading out of New York to the northeast.
Now, open New York’s CITY DISPLAY again and look at the RESOURCE MAP.
Notice that, after the construction of the road, the same Grassland- Shield square is now generating one trade good icon in addition to its former resources.
In addition to this benefit, roads increase movement speed: units only expend one-third of a movement point to move along a road, no matter what type of terrain the road occupies.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
Believe it or not, the terrain can still be further improved.
When the Settlers become active again, choose BUILD IRRIGATION from the ORDERS menu, or press the I key.
Building irrigation takes a bit longer than building roads.
While you’re waiting for the Settlers to complete their task, you discover another civilization advance.
If you just discovered Ceremonial Burial, select Monarchy as your next advance.
If you just discovered Monarchy, select Writing as your next advance, and choose NOT JUST YET...
when you are offered the chance to start a revolution to change governments.
Several turns later, the Settlers complete their irrigation project; the terrain square is now marked to show that it is irrigated.
Open the CITY DISPLAY for New York.
Notice that the resource production has not changed as a result of irrigation.
Normally, this would not be the case: irrigation usually increases the grain output of Grasslands by one.
However, under Despotism, your current system of government, any terrain square producing three or more of any resource type has its production reduced by one.
So, instead of three grain, the square still produces only two.
This illustrates the drawbacks of Despotism, and explains why your research is now proceeding toward Monarchy, where such penalties do not exist.
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
While you’re waiting for the next advance to be discovered, use the Settlers unit to build a road between New York and Washington.
Move one square toward Washington and build a road.
Continue until you have connected the two cities.
This will facilitate fast travel between your cities.
After the road is built, use the Settlers to start improving the terrain around Washington.
ESTABLISHING A TRADE ROUTE .
Shortly after you start building your inter-city road, the Caravan in New York is completed.
You’ll be using this Caravan to establish a trade route between New York and Little Bighorn.
Trade routes increase the amount of trade goods generated in both their home city and the city with which the trade route is established.
Trade routes also give the Caravan’s home city a cash and science bonus on the turn when the route is established.
Each city can operate up to three separate trade routes.
After you are notified of the Caravan’s completion, a menu appears listing the possible trade goods that the Caravan can carry.
Select each commodity in turn, and click the SUPPLY AND DEMAND button to review what cities traffic in that item.
If Little Bighorn demands one of the items on your list, select that item and click OK.
Otherwise, select any item and click OK.
You get both the trade increase and a cash and science bonus no matter what your Caravan carries, but the cash and science bonuses are bigger if you supply goods demanded by the destination city.
Confirm your choice by clicking CONFIRM AND ZOOM.
When New York’s CITY DISPLAY appears, change the city’s production to Marketplace.
The Marketplace improvement increases both tax and luxury output in New York.
As soon as the Caravan becomes active, start moving toward Washington.
It takes a while to get to Little Bighorn, because a Caravan moves at a rate of one square per turn.
It’s worth the trip, though.
The farther away the destination, the higher your cash and science bonus.
En-route to Washington, you discover another civilization advance (Monarchy or, if you’re ahead of the game, Writing).
For now, don’t declare a revolution.
Select your next advance: Writing (if you don’t already have it) or Map Making.
We’ll come back to Monarchy shortly.
You will, in fact, discover another advance before your Caravan reaches Little Bighorn.
This time, choose Map Making (if you don’t have it) or Warrior Code.
Meanwhile, back on the trade route, your Caravan reaches Washington.
Move the Caravan into the city.
When the Caravan enters Washington, you get a list of options.
You can establish a trade route with Washington (which you don’t want to do).
You are also given the option to HELP BUILD WONDER.
(Remember, Washington is still in the process of building the Colossus.)
If you were to choose this option, the Caravan would be disbanded, and 60 shields would be added to the production of the Colossus.
This is an excellent way to accelerate the construction of Wonders of the World which, obviously, take quite a long time to build.
For now, however, your goal is to establish a trade route with Little Bighorn.
Choose KEEP MOVING and click OK.
Continue moving the Caravan until you reach Little Bighorn, then move the unit into the city.
Choose ESTABLISH TRADE ROUTE from the menu.
You have now established your first trade route!
A message appears telling you how much money you receive as an immediate bonus.
An equivalent number of beakers is added to your current research project at the same time.
Open New York’s CITY DISPLAY.
Note that the trade route is now listed in the bottom center portion of the CITY DISPLAY, and that New York’s arrow production has increased as a result of the trade route.
CHANGING GOVERNMENTS .
By now, you have established a small, but thriving, civilization.
You are doing well, but you could do better.
The last thing you’ll learn in this tutorial is how to improve your civilization by switching to better forms of government.
Open New York’s CITY DISPLAY.
Note that the city is currently generating six grain, five arrows, and four shields (assuming that the trade route with Little Bighorn is generating one arrow.
Your actual number of arrows might vary slightly.)
Close the CITY DISPLAY.
Now, it’s time to change governments.
Select the REVOLUTION!
option from the KINGDOM menu and confirm your choice to overthrow the government.
Within a few turns, a menu appears listing the systems of government currently available to you.
Choose MONARCHY and click OK.
Your civilization is now ruled through a Monarchy.
The TAX RATE window appears, giving you the opportunity to reset your division of trade between taxes, luxuries, and science.
Note that your maximum rate is now capped at 70 percent and close the window.
Now, you’ll make discoveries more quickly.
Let’s take a look at the effects of the government change.
Open New York’s CITY DISPLAY.
Look at the production changes.
The city’s grain production has increased from six to eight.
Note that the Grassland-Shield square you irrigated earlier is now generating three grain instead of two.
The other extra grain is coming from the city square itself (it is automatically irrigated when the city is built).
Trade has also increased as a result of the change in government.
The Whale square is now generating one additional arrow.
This has the effect of increasing the number of beakers from three to four.
Shield generation has remained the same because none of the terrain currently in use around New York is capable of producing more than two shields under the present circumstances.
If you look at the CITY DISPLAY for Washington, you’ll notice similar increases in that city as well.
CONCLUSION .
So ends the tutorial.
You should now be familiar with many of the basic concepts of Civilization II.
Feel free to continue playing the tutorial game and see how you do, or go back and start a new game on a randomly generated world.
Remember, you have only scratched the surface when it comes to learning the game.
Use the rest of this manual and the on-line CIVILOPEDIA in the game to help you with new concepts as you encounter them.
The basics of cities .
When you start a game of Civilization II, your Settlers unit stands on a terrain square surrounded by the darkness of the unknown.
Though you can choose to let this single group of Settlers (if you’re really special, you could possibly have two Settlers units) wander the world alone, that’s not the point of the game.
As soon as you’ve found a decent site, you want your Settlers to build a permanent settlement — a city.
You must build at least one city, because only cities can produce new units, allowing your civilization to grow and develop.
You’ll probably build a dozen or more cities over the course of the game.
Cities are the residences of your population, the sources of tax dollars, and the homes of your scientists.
Each city organizes the development of the area surrounding it, harvesting the nearby agricultural land, natural resources, and potential trade goods, then converting these resources into food, industrial production, technology, and cash.
One way to measure the success of your civilization is by the number and size of the cities you have built or captured.
Larger cities collect more taxes, conduct more technological research, and produce new items faster.
Civilizations with small numbers of cities and small city sizes risk being overrun by larger and more powerful neighbors.
GAINING NEW CITIES .
You can acquire new cities in three ways.
Most frequently, you build them with Settlers units.
If you are aggressive, you can conquer the cities of your neighbors.
Occasionally, you can gain a city when a minor tribe discovered by your units elects to join your civilization.
FOUNDING NEW CITIES .
The most common way to gain new cities is to send out Settlers to tame the wilderness.
In fact, you start the game with a Settlers unit whose primary task is to found your first city.
The terrain under and around your city is important, so if you want to select the best possible place for your metropolis, skip down to Choosing Your Location.
If you want to jump right in, choose a square with rivers, plains and/or grasslands near it.
When your active Settlers unit stands on the square where you wish to build a new city, choose the option BUILD NEW CITY from the ORDERS menu.
If you accidentally build a city by mistake, you can select the CANCEL button on the NAME CITY screen to retrieve your Settlers unit.
Your advisors propose a name for the new city; you can type in a different name if you prefer something else.
When you are satisfied with the name, press e or click the OK button.
The CITY DISPLAY opens so that you can arrange the city’s initial production and economic development.
When the display closes, your new city appears on the map.
The Settlers unit disappears, having converted into the first citizens of your new city.
CHOOSING YOUR LOCATION .
When building a new city, carefully plan where you place it.
Citizens can work the terrain surrounding the city square in an X-shaped pattern (see City Radius for a diagram showing the exact dimensions).
This area is called the CITY RADIUS (the terrain square on which the Settlers were standing becomes the city square).
The natural resources available where a population settles affect its ability to produce food and goods.
Cities built on or near water sources can irrigate to increase their crop yields, and cities near mineral outcroppings can mine for raw materials.
On the other hand, cities surrounded by desert are always handicapped by the aridness of their terrain, and cities encircled by mountains find arable cropland at a premium.
In addition to the economic potential within the city’s radius, you need to consider the proximity of other cities and the strategic value of a location.
Ideally, you want to locate cities in areas that offer a combination of benefits: food for population growth, raw materials for production, and river or coastal areas for trade.
Where possible, take advantage of the presence of special resources on terrain squares (see Terrain & Movement for details on their benefits).
PROXIMITY OF CITIES .
Another consideration when planning new cities is the current or potential location of other cities.
You want to minimize the chance that one city’s radius overlaps another’s.
Since a map square can only be used by one city at a time, radius overlap restricts the potential growth of one or both cities.
Explore nearby lands as soon as possible to begin planning the placement of future cities.
You want to take best advantage of the terrain.
Of course, the geography of your particular continent will limit your choices.
If you find yourself on a small island, your potential city sites will necessarily be more crowded than if you can sprawl across a vast continent.
STRATEGIC VALUE .
The strategic value of a city site is a final consideration.
A city square’s underlying terrain can increase any defender’s strength when that city comes under attack.
In some circumstances, the defensive value of a particular city’s terrain might be more important than the economic value; consider the case where a continent narrows to a bottleneck and a rival holds the other side.
Good defensive terrain (Hills, Mountains, and Jungle) is generally poor for food production and inhibits the early growth of a city.
If you need to compromise between growth and defense, build the city on a Plains or Grassland square with a river running through it if possible.
This yields decent trade production and gains a 50 percent defense bonus.
Regardless of where a city is built, the city square is easier to defend than the same unimproved terrain.
In a city you can build the City Walls improvement, which triples the defense factors of military units stationed there.
Also, units defending a city square are destroyed one at a time if they lose.
Outside of cities, all units stacked together are destroyed when any military unit in the stack is defeated (units in Fortresses are the only exception; see Fortresses).
Placing some cities on the seacoast gives you access to the ocean.
You can launch ship units to explore the world and to transport your units overseas.
With few coastal cities, your sea power is inhibited.
CAPTURING CITIES .
Other civilizations normally defend their cities with one or more military units (armies for short), and sometimes with the city improvement City Walls.
A defended city flies a pennant showing its owner’s color.
A walled city is surrounded by a short wall.
There are two ways to acquire enemy cities: force and subversion.
If you choose force, you must destroy the defenders by successfully attacking with your military units.
Once the city is undefended, you can move a friendly army into the city and capture it.
If you prefer subversion, you must successfully bribe dissidents in the city with your Diplomat or Spy unit (and sufficient funds — see Diplomats & Spies for all the details on such espionage).
The dissidents capture the city for you, as their armies automatically convert to your side.
Once captured, the city becomes yours to control and manage as you would any other.
Capturing an enemy city can also lead to side benefits, such as the discovery of a new technological advance and plundered cash to add to your coffers.
Capture, however, eliminates one point of population (unless the City Walls, which can prevent this loss, are still standing).
Therefore, when your units enter a city with only one point of population remaining, it is destroyed instead of captured.
Diplomats and Spies can incite dissidents (see Diplomats & Spies) to capture a city without reducing its population below one.
Occupation of an enemy city destroys roughly half of the improvements the city has built, including all Temples and Cathedrals.
Certain military units, such as Fighters and Bombers, are also destroyed rather than captured.
Capture does not affect Wonders of the World (though, of course, destroying a city does — see Wonders of the World for more details).
Inciting revolt creates less damage to the city, as the dissidents rely less on bombardment, and their familiarity allows them to pinpoint targets more accurately.
A city captured by revolt loses only the Temple and Cathedral improvements (if it had them).
CONVERTING MINOR TRIBES .
As your units explore the world, they might encounter the villages of minor tribes — civilizations too small or too peripatetic to count as “settled” (see Minor Tribes for the scoop on these situations).
Minor tribes react to contact with a range of emotions, from delight to hostility.
Occasionally, a minor tribe is sufficiently awed by your emissaries to immediately form a new city and become part of your civilization.
Move your exploring unit onto the village icon to discover the tribe’s attitude towards your civilization.
If they choose to form a new city, you need do nothing: Your advisors propose a name for the new city (which you can change if you prefer something else).
When you are satisfied with the name, press e or click the OK button.
The CITY DISPLAY opens so that you can arrange the city’s initial production and economic development.
When you close the display, your new city appears on the map.
The village icon is replaced by the new city square, and members of the tribe settle in as the first citizens of your new city.
THE PARTS OF A CITY .
THE CITY SQUARE .
The terrain a city occupies is especially important because it is always under development.
You cannot take workers off of this square when adjusting resource development on the RESOURCE MAP (see Resource Map in Reference: Screen by Screen).
If this area is not useful, especially for producing food, then population growth in the new city is handicapped.
For this reason, you’ll find new cities do best when they are built on Plains or Grasslands squares or squares with rivers.
These terrain types provide the best food production and, thus, faster population growth.
Note that all beginning civilizations possess the technologies of building Roads, Mining, and Irrigation.
When you found a city on a Plains, Grassland, Hills, or Desert square, (or the special terrains based on those types) including squares with rivers running through them, the city square is automatically improved by roads and irrigation.
When you found a city on any other type of terrain, the city square is automatically improved by roads and, if applicable, mining.
You cannot assign a Settlers or Engineer unit to further improve a city square by, for example, adding mining or railroads, regardless of terrain, although you can change the terrain to another type (Forest to Plains, for example).
Move a Settlers or Engineer unit into the city square and check the ORDERS menu to see what changes are possible.
City squares do automatically improve with the discovery of certain advances.
THE CITY RADIUS .
The potential area of development, called the City Radius, extends two map squares out from a city in every direction except vertically or horizontally.
Since the development area only extends one square from the city square in these directions, the resulting “radius” actually looks like a fat X, not like a circle.
If the city grows large enough, its citizens can bring all of this area into development.
When planning a new city, consider the long-term benefits of all the terrain squares within this radius.
For the city’s population to increase, the radius must encompass terrain that workers can cultivate to produce food.
Your (potentially) most important cities also have raw materials available.
These cities can quickly build and support military units and Wonders.
Hills and Forests allow your citizens to produce good quantities of raw materials, as do squares containing special terrain icons (pheasants, buffalo, coal, fish, and others — see Special Terrains for complete details).
The importance of trade in generating taxes and civilization advances makes river squares especially good sites for cities early in the game.
Where you have no rivers or coastal areas, you can generate trade by building roads on Plains or Grasslands.
When a square within your CITY RADIUS is outlined, it indicates that another city is claiming that terrain’s resource production.
It could be one of your cities, if the city radii overlap.
If you own both cities, you can flip between Resource Maps to adjust production in each to the best benefit of both locations.
It could also be a rival city that one of your opponents has built close to you.
Finding an outlined square in your city’s radius might even lead you to discover a rival city in unrevealed territory or outside of your units’ observation range.
Managing your cities .
Once you’ve founded, captured, or gained a city, you need to direct its growth and production.
Each city has different assets and demands, so each should be managed individually.
You must keep several goals in mind when managing a city: maintaining population growth, maximizing a useful mix of economic development (food, raw materials, and trade), producing tax revenue, producing technological research, and producing useful units and improvements, all the while maintaining an attitude of contentment and thereby avoiding civil disorder.
For cities to grow and prosper, they need to balance economic output with the citizens’ needs for infrastructure and services.
CITY MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS .
As your city increases in size, its population expands, and it produces more and more food, shields, and trade.
These represent your city’s basic resources: edibles, raw materials, and trade goods.
In city management, you add another layer of concepts which address how you turn these materials into products you can use.
Refer to the CITY DISPLAY as you read.
Grain feeds your population and supports the city’s units.
When a city produces more food than its population and units consume each turn, the excess accumulates in the FOOD STORAGE BOX.
When the box is full, another citizen is added to the POPULATION ROSTER, and the city increases in size.
If your city is not producing enough food each turn to feed its population, the shortfall is noted, and stores are removed from the FOOD STORAGE BOX.
If the box empties, any units that require food for support are disbanded, one by one, until a balance is achieved.
If your city still experiences a shortfall, one citizen is removed from the POPULATION ROSTER, and your city decreases in size.
Shields power your industrial capacity and support the city’s units.
When a city produces more shields than your units expend each turn, the excess shields accumulate in the PRODUCTION BOX each turn.
When the PRODUCTION BOX is full, your city produces something.
It can “build” one of three kinds of things: units which move around the map (like Settlers and Chariots), city improvements which are tied to specific cities (like Libraries and Aqueducts), and Wonders of the World, which give unique benefits to the civilization that builds them (like the Pyramids or Magellan’s Expedition) — but more about these details later.
The type of government your people develop and the distance remote cities are located from your palace affect your shield production.
Sometimes raw materials can be lost to waste.
You can read all about the details of waste under Trade Management Concepts.
If your city runs short of the raw materials it requires each turn, one or more units (that it supports) are forced to disband.
The units farthest from home are disbanded first.
Based on the tax rates you set, trade arrows are further divided into three commodities that your civilization acquires: luxuries, taxes, and science.
These commodities each have their own icons: Luxuries are represented by goblets, taxes are represented by gold, and science or research is represented by beakers.
The type of government your people develop and the distance remote cities are located from your palace affects your trade income.
Sometimes trade can be lost to corruption.
You can read all about the details of trade transactions under Trade Management Concepts.
POPULATION GROWTH .
Keeping a city’s population growing is important because each additional citizen contributes something to your civilization.
Each new citizen brings a new terrain square under production in your CITY RADIUS until there are no empty squares to work.
After this point, each new citizen becomes an Entertainer (see Specialists for details on what Entertainers do).
Thus, population growth increases your economic power, and concurrently, the strength of your civilization.
The size of your population is a major factor in determining your civilization score, and is a measure of how well you have ruled.
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT .
The citizens of a city that work the surrounding countryside harness the economic resources within the city’s radius.
Depending on the needs of your civilization, there might be times when you prefer increased industrial output from a particular city over population growth.
At other times, you’ll want increased trade revenues.
Still other times, sheer population growth might be the most important goal.
You can manipulate the output of a city by reassigning workers on the RESOURCE MAP.
Each terrain square that shows resource icons is being worked by a citizen.
Click on one of those squares, and you take the citizen off work.
An Entertainer icon (a little Elvis) appears at the end of the POPULATION ROSTER.
Now click on an empty terrain square.
Elvis disappears from the POPULATION ROSTER and resources appear in that square, indicating that a citizen is now working there.
By experimenting with the placement of workers on the RESOURCE MAP, you can find the optimum production ratio of food to raw materials to trade for that city.
Having an Entertainer on your POPULATION ROSTER might change the attitude of one or more of your citizens.
For more information on this reaction, see Happiness & Civil Disorder.
TAX REVENUE .
The percentage of your trade that is converted into tax revenue, or gold icons, is determined by the tax rate you set — see Trade Rates for information on how to manipulate the ratios of taxes, science, and luxuries.
Why do you need tax revenue, anyway?
You need revenue, or cash, because most improvements you build within cities require a stipend of gold for maintenance.
Gold is also useful for speeding industrial production (see Rush Jobs), bribing enemy armies or inciting revolts in enemy cities (see Diplomats & Spies), and for negotiating peace with your neighbors (see Diplomacy).
The combined tax revenues of all your cities must exceed their combined maintenance requirements before gold can accumulate in your treasury.
It is not necessary for each city to have a positive cash flow.
However, enough cities must do so to cover your civilizations’ expenses, or your treasury will be depleted to cover the deficit.
You can watch your STATUS window or check with your TRADE ADVISOR to see if you have a surplus or a deficit, as we’ll explain under Advisors in Reference: Screen by Screen.
Some cities might not be especially suited for industrial production because of terrain or other factors.
But they might still be good trading centers, and capable of generating lots of income.
Develop these locations with roads (and later, railroads), trade routes (see Caravans & Freight for the lowdown on trade route bonuses), city improvements like Marketplace, Bank, and Stock Exchange, and Wonders to be your civilization’s cash cows.
If you get to the point where you are no longer interested in building new items in a location, you can use the Capitalization improvement to convert a city’s shields into gold — see the CIVILOPEDIA entry for details. TECHNOLOGICAL RESEARCH .
The greater the research contribution each city makes toward new civilization advances, the faster your people discover each new advance.
The science rate you set determines the amount of research done in each city (see Trade Rates for the essentials of adjusting the ratios of science, taxes, and luxuries).
A city’s research contribution can be influenced by adjusting the city’s total trade income — research is a fraction of trade — by creating Scientists (see Specialists), and by building certain city improvements.
Improvements that can help are the Library, University, and Research Lab which all increase research, and several Wonders.
The Civilization Advances chapter goes into detail about how to read the advance tree, so if you want the nuts and bolts, flip there next.
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION .
Your most valuable cities can be those with the greatest industrial capacity — those whose workers produce the greatest number of shields.
These cities can quickly produce expensive military units with which you can extend the power of your civilization.
They are also best at producing Wonders of the World, as Wonders generally cost immense numbers of shields.
But city management is dynamic.
You must regularly monitor the production of your cities to ensure you are building the items you most need.
Several factors influence a city’s production of shields: The terrain within your CITY RADIUS is most important, as citizens working on some types of terrain produce no shields at all (see Terrain & Movement for further explanations).
You might find it worthwhile to set Settlers (and later, Engineers) to improving the terrain squares within your CITY RADIUS so that they yield more or different resources (see Settlers & Engineers for examples of what improvements they can make).
Beyond terrain, the form of government your civilization chooses can cause each city to spend some of its raw materials as maintenance for the military units that call the city home.
It is possible that you can have so many units drawing raw materials from a city that there are no surplus shields.
In a city where this is the case, progress on the item under construction (unit, improvement, or Wonder) stops until the situation is resolved.
A number of strategies allow you to adjust industrial capacity.
The simplest is to shift citizens working on the RESOURCE MAP so that they produce more shields (see Resource Development for instructions).
You can also use Settlers or Engineers to improve a terrain square within the CITY RADIUS so that it yields more shields.
Or, order Settlers units to build a new city (they’ll no longer draw support from the city that sponsored them when they’ve settled their own town).
You might also try reassigning units so that they are attached to a different city (see Homing Units for the low down on how to do this).
Within each city, you can order the construction of improvements such as a Factory, Hydro Plant, or Offshore Platform that increase shield production.
Several Wonders also affect shield output.
Consult the CIVILOPEDIA for the complete list of possible city improvements and Wonders.
It shows the construction and maintenance cost of each item, its purpose, and what advance is required to make it available.
CITY PROTECTION .
Great economic management of a city is worthless if the city is captured by rivals or barbarians.
Therefore, part of your management plan must concern the defense of each city.
The minimum city defense is one army, preferably one with a good defense factor.
A second defender can provide back-up in case the first is taken out (see Military Units for details of combat).
An army with a strong attack factor is also useful.
This unit can strike at enemies that move adjacent to the city, perhaps destroying them before they can launch an attack.
Fortify any armies that you expect to defend a city (choose the FORTIFY option from the ORDERS menu or press the F key) because fortified units gain an increased defense strength — as we’ll explain more fully under Military Units.
A city’s defense can be substantially increased by building City Walls, an improvement that triples any defender’s strength against most attackers (although not against Howitzers or air units).
Veteran status and terrain bonuses are figured in before this tripling takes effect.
City Walls also prevent population loss when defending units are destroyed (see Combat).
When civilization advances make available new army types with better defense factors, take the first opportunity to replace old defenders with better units.
Since the offensive capability of your enemies improves as they acquire new advances, your defenses must improve to keep up.
Linking cities with roads and railroads can be very helpful in speeding the movement of units from one end of your empire to trouble spots elsewhere.
This puts your defensive armies on “interior lines,” allowing them to move rapidly to where they are needed.
IMPROVEMENTS .
City improvements represent the commercial, bureaucratic, educational, and public works infrastructure that make large and efficient cities possible.
In the real world, New York City’s dense population depends on the extensive subway system for transportation, and buys electrical power generated by distant grids.
Los Angeles is located in a desert and pipes in much of its water from sources hundreds of miles away.
In Civilization II, improvements are also critical to the growth and importance of cities.
Inadequate provision of these facilities can limit the potential size of a city.
Each improvement provides some service or otherwise makes a city work more efficiently.
You must choose which improvement to implement at what time — does your city need a Marketplace or a Library more?
Would a Courthouse provide more benefit than a Colosseum?
City improvements are listed alphabetically in the CIVILOPEDIA.
It explains the building costs, benefits, and maintenance fees of each improvement, along with any conditions which make the improvement obsolete or non-functional.
LOSING IMPROVEMENTS .
Improvements are not invulnerable, nor are they guaranteed to be permanent fixtures in an ever-dynamic city.
The Barracks improvement, for instance, has a planned obsolescence.
Once your civilization discovers the advance of Gunpowder, your old Barracks is rendered obsolete, and it disappears.
(The same result attends your discovery of Combustion.
These military installations are sensitive to changes in technology.)
To regain its benefits each time, you must rebuild a Barracks improvement in each city you desire to have one.
Most improvements don’t disappear over time, but they can be vulnerable to capture, fire sale, and sabotage.
If you’re really strapped for cash, you can even sell a city’s improvements.
CAPTURE .
Some, all, or none of a city’s improvements might be destroyed when it is captured by another civilization.
When a city is completely destroyed, all improvements are destroyed as well.
FIRE SALE .
If you have less money in your treasury than is needed to pay a city improvement’s maintenance cost at the beginning of your turn, Civilization II automatically sells the improvement for cash.
Deficit spending is not allowed — even if by the end of the turn you would have had a positive cash flow again.
SABOTAGE .
Foreign Diplomats or Spies can enter one of your cities and attempt industrial sabotage (of course, your envoys can attempt to sabotage your rivals’ cities, too).
This might result in the destruction of an existing improvement (or it might scrap the item that city is currently producing — see Diplomats & Spies for complete details on diplomatic actions).
There are two defenses against this type of attack — destroying the Diplomat or Spy before he or she can enter your city, or stationing Diplomats or Spies of your own in the city for counterespionage.
SELLING IMPROVEMENTS .
To raise cash, click on the improvement in the IMPROVEMENTS ROSTER of the CITY DISPLAY.
A dialog box shows how much gold you could receive for selling the improvement.
Normally you can gain one gold per resource invested in construction.
If you sell, the improvement disappears from the city and the money is added to your treasury.
Selling improvements can be useful when you are short of money and are threatened with the random sale of an improvement.
It can also be useful when you are under attack with no reasonable chance of defending or recovering a city.
By selling off its improvements, you reduce its value to the enemy and salvage something.
You can sell only one improvement per turn in each city.
You cannot sell Wonders of the World.
RUSH JOBS .
There are also times when you need the specific benefits of an improvement right now, and not 20 turns down the line.
If you have sufficient funds, you can rush completion of a partially built item by paying cold, hard cash.
However, speeding construction in this manner costs a premium.
When workers are rushed, they receive overtime wages, and must pay surcharges on material delivery and fabrication.
The surcharges for a rush job depend on what proportion of the work is already completed, whether the job is civil or military or a Wonder, and can cost up to eight times as much gold as the normal accumulation of shield icons.
To rush a job without paying cash, you have two options.
Any Caravan or Freight unit can enter a city where a Wonder is under construction and deliver its goods specifically to the project by choosing the HELP BUILD WONDER option when it arrives.
It contributes the unit cost in shields directly to the RESOURCE BOX.
Alternatively, any unit that disbands in a city contributes one-half its unit cost in shields to the current construction, whether it is a Wonder, an improvement, or another unit.
This represents the retraining of troops and redisbursement of their supplies.
Items completed by rush jobs are available at the beginning of your next turn, so there is no advantage for rushing items that would be complete on the next turn anyway.
To judge whether an item can be completed next turn without rushing, compare the surplus raw materials the city is generating to the number needed for completion.
For very expensive items, it might be useful to consult your CITY STATUS advisor from the ADVISORS menu for an exact count of the remaining cost.
Managing your Trade .
Trade is a fundamental force driving civilizations.
It introduces unique and exotic valuables, stimulates the economy, and fires the imaginations of a culture’s foremost thinkers.
The effects of trade permeate society in many surprising and subtle ways, and your ability to direct trade’s impact is likewise varied.
TRADE MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS .
Taking up where we left off in City Management Concepts, these are the further divisions that result from trade income (arrow icons): luxuries (goblets), taxes (gold), and science funding (beakers).
Luxuries make your population more content.
The availability of luxuries means that some citizens can enjoy a more pampered existence.
Every two goblets make one contented citizen happy.
We’ll talk more about happiness a little later.
Taxes maintain city improvements and add to your treasury.
Taxes support basic city services, and surplus funds accumulate in your treasury.
There are plenty of useful ways to spend money in Civilization II, as we’ll explain in a little while.
If funding dries up, your city might be forced to sell off improvements.
Research funding powers your technological research.
Each new advance requires the accumulation of a certain number of beakers to achieve.
The Civilization Advances chapter explains the details of the search for knowledge, but for now, you just need to know that new discoveries often allow you to build new units and city improvements, and sometimes open up the possibility of building Wonders of the World.
In addition, each discovery leads to further discoveries, creating a chain of progress.
If your cities don’t produce many beakers, your civilization doesn’t progress very fast.
Which of these three is the most important?
That varies according to what you want to achieve right now.
To give trade management the most flexibility, Civilization II lets you adjust the proportion of trade income that is devoted to each of these three areas.
The TAX RATE option on the KINGDOM menu lets you change the ratio of taxes to science to luxuries by ten percent increments, and also shows you how these rates affect your funding and the speed at which your knowledge increases.
In City Concepts, we mentioned that the POPULATION ROSTER can tell you more than just the number of citizens in your city.
It can also tell you your citizens’ general level of contentment.
Citizen icons appear in three different attitudes: happy, content, and unhappy.
When you start building cities, you start with content citizens.
The type of government your civilization develops and the level of difficulty at which you chose to play affect how rapidly unrest begins to trouble your populations.
Unhappy citizens must be balanced by happy citizens, or your city falls into civil disorder.
Not only does civil disorder sound bad, it has all sorts of nasty consequences, as we’ll explain shortly.
For now, you need to know that you can increase the happiness of your citizens several different ways, among them: building specific city improvements like Temples and Marketplaces (we’ll explain all about Improvements shortly), reassigning military units (the dirt about martial law and foreign service effects appears under Military Units), adjusting the tax rates (as we’ll discuss under Kingdom Menu in Reference: Screen by Screen), and pulling citizens off production work to make them specialists (see Specialists for the skinny on this).
Phew!
That’s a lot of stuff to digest all at once.
Just one more thing — we mentioned types of governments two paragraphs ago.
Discovering new advances encompasses more than just new gadgets to improve sanitation and military might.
The game counts philosophical concepts and theories as “new technologies,” too.
Every civilization starts out as a Despotism, but you can develop new forms of government.
These might, in turn, have a profound effect on the happiness of your citizens and the rate at which your citizens produce raw materials, food, and trade.
TRADE RATES .
When you start a new game of Civilization II, none of your trade benefits are tied up in luxuries — instead, 40 percent of your trade goes toward revenue from taxes, and 60 percent of it is funneled into science.
To change the proportion of tax and science income, pull down the KINGDOM menu and choose the option TAX RATE.
Choose a new rate by sliding one or more of the buttons along the slider bars.
A notation at the top of the box mentions the maximum any one percentage can be, given your current form of government.
Another notation lists the income and outflow as gold per turn, and finally, an entry calculates how many turns it will take to achieve a new advance.
If you are interested in focusing on civilization advances, you might want to increase the amount of science being conducted.
If you rapidly build city improvements, you might want to increase your taxes to cover the maintenance costs.
If you are concerned about the attitude of your citizens, you might want to increase the availability of luxuries to make your citizens happier (we’ll explain all about happiness in a few moments).
Experiment with different rates to see what levels of income and science you can achieve.
If it is difficult to adjust all three sliders at once, you can click the box at the right end of any bar to lock that value in place.
Now only the other two sliders move when you drag on one.
GOVERNMENTS .
Another tool of city — and trade — management is the type of government under which your culture operates.
Every civilization starts out as a Despotism, but some of the advances you can research are intellectual in nature, rather than technological, and these include five new governmental concepts.
Once you have discovered a new form of government, you can choose to sponsor a revolution in order to change government types.
(You can also gain access to new forms of government by building the Statue of Liberty Wonder.)
Anarchy, or the lack of government, occurs only when you lose control, either because civil unrest topples your current government, or immediately following a revolution.
Civil unrest continues as long as conditions are ripe for it.
In the case of a revolution, your people’s attitude naturally stabilizes.
After a few turns, once your civilization settles down, a dialog box appears listing all the possible forms of government your culture has available.
Choose the one you like, and that regime takes effect immediately.
A new feature in Civilization II lets you change governments instantaneously and without penalty for the remainder of this turn.
If your first choice turns out to be unsatisfactory, pull down the menu again and select a different government.
Once you press e to end your turn, you must go through the entire revolution process (including several turns of Anarchy) if you want to change governments again.
There are three “ancient” forms of government — Despotism, Monarchy, and the Republic — and three “modern” ones — Communism, Fundamentalism, and Democracy.
The Republic and Democracy are the most sophisticated from an economic point of view, but they impose severe restrictions on your military forces.
The other forms offer trade-offs between economics and increased military flexibility.
In essence, you could summarize governmental variants this way: The more freedom you give your people, the less they will want to fight for you, but the stronger your economy will become.
We’ve collected the details of each form of government’s bonuses and drawbacks in regard to trade, support provided to units, production, and the attitude of the citizenry.
Depending on your style of play, you might not develop each advance in order of sophistication.
ANARCHY .
You have temporarily lost control of the government.
You continue controlling the movements of your units, and cities continue to operate on their own, but some important functions of your civilization grind to a halt until control is restored.
Attitude: Up to three troops in each city can institute martial law; each makes one unhappy citizen content (see Happiness & Civil Disorder).
Corruption & Waste: Corruption is rampant.
Although no maintenance is charged for city improvements, no tax revenue is collected and no scientific research is accomplished while Anarchy continues.
Resource Support: Military units do not require raw material support until the number of units making a city their home (see Unit Roster) exceeds the number of citizens on the POPULATION ROSTER.
Each military unit in excess of the city’s population points requires one shield for industrial support.
Settlers require one food for support each turn.
Special Conditions: While Anarchy continues, citizens cannot work up to their potential.
The penalty for this atmosphere of tension is that workers produce one fewer resource icon in any terrain that can generate more than two icons of any one kind.
Mines, for example, which might normally be worked for three shields, only output two under Anarchy.
DESPOTISM .
You rule by absolute fiat.
The people just have to live with it because your will is enforced by the army.
Due to the severe limits on economic and personal freedom, production is at a minimum.
But total control makes conducting war relatively easy.
Attitude: Up to three troops in each city can enforce martial law; each makes one unhappy citizen content (see Happiness & Civil Disorder).
Corruption & Waste: Corruption and waste are both major problems under Despotism.
Trade income losses due to corruption and shield production losses due to waste increase with the distance a city is located from its capital.
Resource Support: Under a Despotism, military units do not require resource support until the number of units making a city their home (see Unit Roster) exceeds the number of citizens on the POPULATION ROSTER.
Each military unit in excess of the city’s population points requires one shield for support each turn.
Settlers require one food for support.
Special Conditions: Citizens cannot work up to their potential.
The penalty for this atmosphere of tension is that workers produce one fewer resource icon in any terrain that can generate more than two icons of any one kind.
Mines, for example, which might normally be worked for three shields, only output two under Despotism.
In addition, the maximum rate at which you can set tax, luxury, or science production is 60 percent.
MONARCHY .
Your rule is less than absolute, and an aristocracy of upper-class citizens influences your decisions.
The aristocratic classes, at least, have a certain amount of economic freedom, and this results in the potential for greater production.
Your feudal vassals are partially responsible for helping to defend your kingdom, but they may in some cases deduct a share of your civilization’s production as maintenance for military units.
Attitude: Up to three troops in each city can institute martial law; each makes one unhappy citizen content (see Happiness & Civil Disorder).
Corruption & Waste: A certain amount of your economic output is siphoned off by your aristocrats, particularly those farthest from your watchful eye — corruption and waste are significant problems under a Monarchy, though not as severe as they are under Despotism.
Trade income losses due to corruption and shield production losses due to waste increase with the distance a city is located from its capital.
Resource Support: Your feudal vassals support up to three units from each city at no cost to you.
Each additional unit requires one shield per turn.
Settlers require one food per turn for support.
Special Conditions: Under a Monarchy, the maximum rate at which you can set tax, luxury, or science production is 70 percent.
REPUBLIC .
You rule over an assembly of city-states formed from the cities that your civilization controls.
Each city is an autonomous state, yet also is part of the republic which you rule.
The people feel that you rule at their request.
They enjoy substantial personal and economic freedom, and this results in greatly increased trade.
A Senate reviews your diplomacy, and has a chance to override your decisions.
Military conflict is unpopular among the masses, and your government must bear the full cost of supporting its army.
Attitude: Each ground and naval unit beyond the first that is not stationed in a friendly city or in a Fortress within three squares of a friendly city (except units whose attack strength is zero), and each Bomber, Stealth Bomber, Helicopter, or missile unit — regardless of the city it occupies — makes one citizen unhappy each turn.
NOTE: In Civilization II, units are not penalized based on their home city; they need only be in any friendly city.
Corruption & Waste: Corruption and waste remain a problem under a Republic, though not as severe as they are under a Monarchy.
Trade income losses due to corruption and shield production losses due to waste increase with the distance a city is located from its capital.
Resource Support: Each military unit requires one shield for support each turn.
Settlers require two food per turn.
Special Conditions: Under a Republic your workers produce an extra arrow icon in any square where they are already producing at least one.
Your Senate can force you into accepting a peaceful resolution to any negotiation, though it will only choose to do so roughly 50 percent of the time.
Finally, the maximum rate at which you can set tax, luxury, or science production is 80 percent.
COMMUNISM .
You are the head of a communist government, and you rule with the support of the controlling party.
Although this form of government allows more production than Despotism, the orthodoxy of the party restricts personal and economic freedom, limiting trade.
On the positive side, corruption is negated by the action of the local party apparatus, the army and secret police suppress most dissent, and your large security forces recruit excellent spies.
Attitude: Up to three troops in each city can enforce martial law; each makes two unhappy citizens content (see Happiness & Civil Disorder).
Corruption & Waste: Under Communism, state control of the economy eliminates organized crime, and none of your cities suffer corruption or waste.
Resource Support: Regardless of city size, each military unit beyond the third a city supports requires one shield each turn.
Settlers require two food for support.
Special Conditions: All Spy units produced under Communist governments are Veterans.
Under Communism, the maximum rate at which you can set tax, luxury, or science production is 80 percent.
FUNDAMENTALISM .
Fundamentalism is a form of government based on the literal, forceful, and uncompromising interpretation of religious dogma.
Fundamentalist societies maintain that their own beliefs are the only true path to salvation, and tend to be rigidly intolerant of any dissenting view — a fact which tends to choke off intellectual development.
On the other hand, the people in such societies are often fanatically devoted to their beliefs, and may be willing to die, use force, or commit great atrocities to preserve them.
This unthinking devotion, often obnoxious to neighboring societies, can be harnessed by a clever and cynical leader.
Attitude: Under Fundamentalism, no citizen is ever unhappy!
Improvements that normally convert unhappy citizens to content citizens produce “tithes” (gold) equivalent to the number of people they would normally convert, and require no maintenance.
Corruption & Waste: Fundamentalism has very low rates of corruption and waste.
Resource Support: Because of your people’s zeal, each city can support ten military units at no cost to you.
Settlers eat two food per turn.
Only fundamentalists can build Fanatic units, which never require support.
Special Conditions: Under Fundamentalism, tax/luxury/science rates cannot be set higher than 80 percent.
In addition, the rigidity of mindset and emphasis on doctrine means that all scientific research is HALVED.
The diplomatic penalties for “terrorist acts” (such as bombing city improvements, poisoning wells, and so forth) committed by Diplomats and Spies is reduced, since the world comes to expect no better.
DEMOCRACY .
You rule as the elected executive of a modern Democracy.
The people feel that you rule because they chose you.
The degree of freedom allowed under this government results in the maximum opportunity for economic production and trade.
However, the people also have a very strong voice in determining how much economic production is devoted to improving the standard of living.
Any diplomatic decisions you make are subject to review by your Senate — and the Senate always opposes actions that would lead to war.
Maintaining a military force in the field comes with great political and economic costs.
Attitude: Each ground and naval unit not stationed in a friendly city or in a Fortress within three squares of a friendly city (except units whose attack strength is zero), and each Bomber, Stealth Bomber, Helicopter, or missile unit — regardless of the city it occupies — makes two citizens unhappy in its home city.
NOTE: In Civilization II, units are not penalized based on their home city; they need only be in any friendly city.
In addition, Democracy is fragile.
If even one of your cities remains in civil disorder for more than a turn, your government collapses into Anarchy.
Corruption & Waste: One of Democracy’s greatest advantages is its ability to squelch corruption and waste.
Neither exists in your cities.
Resource Support: Each military unit appropriates one shield for support each turn.
Settlers require two food for support each turn.
Special Conditions: Under Democracy, your workers generate an additional arrow icon wherever at least one already exists.
Patriotism and strong democratic traditions make your cities and units immune to all forms of bribery.
Finally, the Senate can force a peaceful resolution to any negotiation, and will do so whenever possible.
HAPPINESS & CIVIL DISORDER .
Happiness and its inverse state, civil disorder, are indirectly related to trade.
Lack of trade leads to stagnation, and a slow economy means a lack of goods and services.
The citizens in your cities have one of three different attitudes or emotional states: happiness, contentment, or unhappiness.
The first citizens of your first city start out in a contented state.
As the population of the city grows, competition for jobs, commodities, and services increases.
Eventually, depending on the difficulty level at which you play, the form of government your civilization employs, and the economic conditions in your city, some citizens start to grumble and display unhappiness.
If you don’t take an active role in city management as population increases, the natural trend of citizens’ attitudes is toward unhappiness.
So what can you do to counter this trend?
If your population is already suffering civil disorder because of an attitude imbalance, you need to take immediate steps, as we suggest under Restoring Order.
However, you needn’t wait until a crisis occurs; you can keep citizens content by taking a longer outlook and providing services as the demand becomes imminent, or even ahead of demand.
The temperament of your citizens depends on the level of difficulty at which you play.
At Chieftain level, your people are so even-tempered that the first six citizens on the POPULATION ROSTER start out content.
Each new citizen above this number starts with a bad attitude, and must depend on improvements, luxuries, martial law, and/or Wonders of the World to improve his or her state of mind.
The number of citizens who start content decreases by one with each successive level of difficulty, until at Deity level, your people are so temperamental that only one citizen starts out content.
The second and subsequent citizens show their unhappiness, and must be cajoled into better humor with any of the management tools at your disposal.
SPECIAL UNHAPPINESS FACTORS .
There are two special conditions that cause further unhappiness in some populations.
Under a Despotism, and to a progressively lesser degree under other types of government, citizen unhappiness increases with the number of cities.
This can lead to very unhappy citizens who must be converted first to unhappy citizens before they can become content.
In Republics and Democracies, each ground or naval unit not in a friendly city or fortress within three squares of a friendly city, and each bomber, Helicopter, or missile unit regardless of where it is located, might create unhappy citizens.
You can think of it as units “in the field.”
Because of their routine flight training, most air units are always “in the field,” but the protective role of fighters makes them an exception to the rule.
In a Republic, the first unit in the field does not cause discontent.
Each subsequent army in the field creates one unhappy citizen.
If your civilization is a Democracy, each unit in the field causes two unhappy citizens.
Units with an attack strength of zero (that is, an ADM rating that starts with zero, like Transports and Engineers) do not cause unhappiness in this manner.
When a city is in disorder, disbanding distant military units, returning them to their home cities, or changing their home cities can make some unhappy citizens content and might restore the city to order.
CIVIL DISORDER .
As we mentioned in City Management Concepts, cities that don’t maintain a favorable balance of happy people over unhappy people go into civil disorder.
Cities in civil disorder produce no tax revenue, technological research, or food surpluses, and the condition suspends production.
Prolonged civil disorder might bring down a government, and throw your civilization into Anarchy.
A nuclear reactor in a city suffering civil disorder might experience a meltdown due to lax safety controls (see Nuclear Meltdown).
Keeping a city stable is a very high priority.
A city suffers civil disorder when unhappy people outnumber happy people.
Content people and Specialists are ignored in the calculation.
When order is restored, the city returns to normal operation the next turn.
You can restore order in several ways.
RESTORING ORDER .
You can pay to complete an improvement, such as a Temple, that can convert sufficient unhappy citizens to contentment (or content citizens to happiness) to restore the balance.
See Rush Jobs for instructions on how to do this.
You can also change the tax rates of your civilization.
Increasing the availability of luxuries might convert some content people into happy citizens, allowing them to balance the unhappy populace.
See Trade Rates for information on economic manipulation.
You can take one or more citizens out of the work force, and make them Specialists.
This increases the number of happy people.
For information on how to do this, see Specialists.
When creating Specialists, be careful not to also cause shortages of food or resources that trigger starvation of the population or the scrapping of armies.
If your civilization operates under Anarchy, Despotism, Monarchy, or Communism, you can use martial law to restore order to a city.
Up to three military units, each with an attack factor of one or more, can be stationed in a city to enforce martial law.
Each military unit makes one unhappy citizen in a city content under the first three types of government.
When you are operating under Communism, martial law is doubly effective, and each army makes two citizens content.
If you have enough military units to enforce it, and a low enough level of unhappiness, martial law might be enough to restore order.
WE LOVE THE _____ DAY .
If a city’s population becomes sufficiently happy, it (not your whole civilization — just this one location) spontaneously holds a celebration in honor of your rule.
The people declare a “We Love the (title of the leader) Day” in thanks for the prosperity your management has made possible.
While the circumstances that support this celebratory mood continue, the city enjoys certain benefits, depending on your civilization’s type of government.
You will see the effects of celebration begin on the first full turn that a city celebrates, that is, the turn after the party is announced.
To trigger a celebration day, a city must fulfill certain conditions: there can be no unhappy citizens in the city, there must be at least as many happy citizens as content citizens, and the POPULATION ROSTER must number at least three citizens.
Specialists are considered content citizens for this calculation.
For example, a city with five happy citizens, four content citizens, and no unhappy citizens celebrates.
A city with ten happy citizens, three content citizens and one unhappy citizen does not.
ANARCHY .
The celebration has no effect when your government is in Anarchy.
DESPOTISM .
The celebrating city collects resources as if its government is a Monarchy (see Governments).
This can increase the amount of food and raw materials your citizens can produce in certain improved (irrigated and mined) terrain types.
MONARCHY/COMMUNISM/FUNDAMENTALISM .
A celebrating city currently ruled by any of these governments collects resources as if its government is a Republic (see Governments).
This increases the amount of trade your citizens can produce in any terrain that generates trade goods.
REPUBLIC/DEMOCRACY .
A city currently ruled by either of these governments increases in population by one point each turn it celebrates, so long as sufficient food is available.
This can result in dramatic growth of the city.
Terrain and movement .
TERRAIN & MOVEMENT CONCEPTS .
The game map in Civilization II is divided into small independent parts, or terrain squares, as we mentioned in City Concepts.
For simplicity, each square consists of a single type of terrain, even though the real world is not as perfectly organized as that.
To represent that some types of terrain are easy to walk across and others require slogging through mud or hacking through thick underbrush, your units spend movement points to enter each new square.
Every unit has an ADM rating (the acronym stands for Attack/Defense/Movement); the M, or third number in the rating, indicates how many movement points it can spend in a turn.
You can find out all about units and their ADM ratings under Military Units.
Each terrain type has its own movement point cost (and they’re all conveniently listed in the TERRAIN CHARTS on the Poster).
Your Settlers or Engineer units can improve (that is, lower) these movement point costs by laying roads and later railroads in terrain squares (see Settlers & Engineers for the lowdown on how they do this).
When a unit moves into a new square, it pays that square’s movement point cost.
If it has any movement points — or fractions of movement points — left after moving one square, a unit can attempt to move again until it reaches the limit of its movement points.
Attacking counts as movement — that is, your units spend movement points to attack.
You can read about the details under Military Units; what you need to know here is that a unit’s attack strength might be reduced if it has less than a full movement point remaining at the time of combat.
You’ll get a message asking if you want to continue with the attack.
The proximity of enemy units or cities can also restrict a unit’s movement options.
Units and cities have what in military circles is called a zone of control; their influence extends into the eight squares that immediately surround them.
Your units cannot move directly from one rival’s zone of control into another’s zone of control unless you have an alliance with the second tribe.
This represents a unit’s ability to threaten or pin down enemy troops nearby.
When an enemy Legion is nearby waiting to pounce, your troops cannot afford to expose their vulnerable flanks.
The blockers don’t have to be units or cities of the same civilization.
The Movement Restriction diagram should make it clearer, so give it a look-see.
Some units (such as Diplomats, Caravans, and all air and naval units) have special abilities that allow them to ignore these restrictions.
TYPES OF TERRAIN .
The differences in terrain are deeper than a variety of artwork and colors to make the game map more visually interesting.
Each type of terrain has its own economic usefulness, effect on movement, and effect on combat.
Detailed information about the terrain types is provided in the TERRAIN CHART on the Poster, and from the CIVILOPEDIA.
To get terrain information from the CIVILOPEDIA, click on the CIVILOPEDIA menu, and select the TERRAIN TYPES option.
A list of both standard terrain types and their special resources appears.
If you don’t recognize the icon for a special resource, click on the standard terrain type to see what special resources are possible.
A NOTE ABOUT RIVERS .
In Civilization II, rivers are not a type of terrain unto themselves.
Instead, they can flow through any type of terrain.
Rivers make movement easier for ground units that follow the line of the river bed either up- or downstream, because each square costs only one-third of a movement point, regardless of the underlying terrain.
Settlers and Engineer units cannot build roads across rivers until your tribe discovers the Bridge Building advance.
Rivers count as sources of water for the purposes of irrigation.
Citizens working terrain through which a river flows gain a bonus arrow icon, representing the ease with which rivers facilitate trade.
Finally, a river’s presence enhances the defense bonus of the terrain through which it flows.
STANDARD TERRAIN SQUARES .
The standard types of terrain can be divided along climactic lines.
Here’s a short summary.
Glacier and Tundra squares are both cold terrain.
Neither produces much in the way of raw materials, and neither can be converted into more profitable terrain.
Swamp and Jungle are both wet terrain.
Neither is easy to move through, and it costs a considerable investment of time to convert either into more profitable terrain.
Plains and Grassland squares are both open terrain.
Both are easy to travel across, and when improved, both produce substantial amounts of food as well as other raw materials.
Hills and Mountains squares are both vertically challenging.
They take some effort to travel across and yield more raw materials when developed by mining.
Ocean squares generate substantial amounts of trade, and appropriate types of terrain bordering them can be irrigated.
Ground units can move at a rate of one-third of a movement point per square if they follow a riverbed up- or downstream.
Desert squares are dry terrain that can be developed for marginal production.
Forest squares are difficult to travel through, but yield decent raw materials.
SPECIAL TERRAIN SQUARES .
Each standard terrain square can be enhanced by one of two types of special resource.
Where special resources appear, they add significantly to the economic value of the terrain.
Distinct symbols mark the location of these resources.
If your Settlers or Engineer units convert a square containing a special resource icon into another terrain type, the original specialty is lost.
If the new terrain type can be enhanced by special resources, it is; if the new terrain is Grassland, it remains a standard terrain.
Right now, we’ll give you a brief summary.
Glaciers can be enhanced by Oil deposits, representing increased mineral wealth, and therefore yielding extra shields when worked.
Alternatively, the presence of Walruses indicate the availability of Ivory, with its greatly enhanced trade goods yield.
Musk Ox stand in some Tundra squares, indicating excellent food sources or the potential for good grazing; workers in these squares can produce additional food.
Other Tundra squares display Fur, indicating the high potential for arrows because of desirable trade goods.
Swamp squares can contain Peat, whose usefulness as fuel is indicated by the enhanced shield yield, or perhaps Spice, exotic flavorings which are prized the world over, and therefore represent bonus yields in both food and arrow icons.
Gems shine in Jungle terrain to indicate the presence of precious stones, ivory, spices, salt, or other valuable commodities.
These are good trade items and, therefore, the square in which they appear generates substantial arrows.
Jungles also have the potential to produce exotic Fruits which naturally increase the food output.
Buffalo trotting across the Plains represent raw materials on the hoof; workers in these squares generate extra shields.
On the other hand, Grain represents a particularly fertile piece of open ground, and a rich source of food.
Coal deposits, shown as black lump icons in Hills terrain, represent rich locations of coal or metal ores.
These areas produce greatly increased shields, especially when mined.
On the other hand, some hills are Wine country, especially suited for growing grapes.
Wine terrain yields greatly increased trade.
Gold gleams in Mountains terrain, representing a bonanza of precious metal ore.
The value of these deposits produces tremendous trade goods.
Alternatively, workers might discover Iron deposits in mountainous areas, yielding a substantial number of shields.
Fish swimming in Ocean terrain represent the location of underwater banks and reefs where currents and nutrients create excellent fishing grounds.
Fishing grounds produce increased amounts of food.
On the other hand, Whales indicate the bounty of the deeps, and an increase in raw materials and trade goods as well as foodstuffs.
An Oasis is a very fertile island in Desert terrain where workers can harvest substantial quantities of food.
Conversely, Oil, representing the presence of mineral wealth, especially petroleum, can also be found in Desert squares.
As they do in Glaciers, Oil squares in Desert terrain yield extra shields when worked.
A Pheasant peers through some Forest terrain.
The presence of game indicates excellent food sources available.
On the other hand, Silk represents a luxurious product of mulberry Forests that brings increased yield from trade goods.
OPTIMAL CITY SITES .
The economic usefulness of the various terrain types is important when selecting city sites.
Citizens work the terrain within a city’s radius to produce the food, raw materials, and trade that the city needs to grow and be productive (see The City Radius).
Some terrain types are more valuable than others, in that citizens working them produce more resources.
Other terrains start out yielding little, and only develop their full potential when they are improved.
These squares can be irrigated, mined, or surfaced for increased economic value.
Other squares are important because they can be converted into more valuable terrain, as we’ll discuss soon (for instructions on how to irrigate, mine, surface, and convert terrain, see Settlers & Engineers).
The best city sites offer immediate food, raw material, and trade production, plus the potential for long term development.
TERRAIN CONVERSION .
When surveying sites for a new city, keep in mind the potential for terrain squares within the city’s radius to be improved.
Hills and Mountains squares can be mined so that citizens working them produce increased raw materials.
Plains and Grassland squares, whether or not rivers run through them, can be irrigated so that citizens working there produce more food.
Swamp and Jungle squares can be cleared to yield Grassland or planted to yield Forest.
Forest can be cleared to yield a Plains.
Plains and Grassland squares can be retimbered to yield Forest if you need raw materials.
An area dense with Jungle and Swamp squares looks barren at first, but has the potential to become a very rich city site.
Improvements are not limited to agricultural effects.
Settlers and Engineers also improve terrain by laying roads across terrain squares.
Roads allow better access to a city, and therefore, increase the trade goods citizens working some squares produce.
Plains, Grassland, and Desert squares all produce trade once penetrated by roads.
Railroads eliminate the movement point cost of the terrain across which they are laid and might increase resource production as well.
For more information on terrain improvements, see Settlers & Engineers — they’re the units that do the work.
PLANETARY CARETAKING .
Manipulating terrain to produce the maximum number of shields has a downside, of course.
One cost of heedless industrial growth is a gradual polluting and poisoning of the environment.
Of the many dangers posed by pollution in the real world, the greatest might be global warming.
Theorists believe an unchecked rise in the planet’s atmospheric temperature threatens catastrophic geographic changes including melting polar ice caps, rising sea levels, and parched farmlands.
Different threats of poisoning occur if nuclear weapons are detonated or a nuclear reactor melts down.
Civilization II models pollution from industry and nuclear disaster as a balancing factor for growth.
As you steer your civilization into the industrial age, you must manage your cities and monitor your terrain to minimize pollution and prevent the disaster of global warming.
POLLUTION .
Every turn, the game assigns a probability of pollution occurring within the economic radius of each city.
The likelihood of this contamination depends on two factors: the number of shields produced (industrial pollution) and the population supported (smog).
In some cities, industrial pollution is the major factor in the calculation, and in other cities smog is a bigger hazard.
Below a certain level, the chance of pollution is negligible, but as industrial output builds, so does the likelihood of its darker side effects.
Smog has no effect on pollution calculations until your civilization acquires the advance of Industrialization.
Smokestacks begin appearing on the CITY DISPLAY in the GENERAL INFORMATION window when the combined pressures of smog and industrial pollution begin to create a significant threat of contamination.
The number of stacks roughly indicates the probability each turn of a square within the city radius becoming polluted.
For example, a city generating a large number of raw materials each turn (say 20) and inhabited by a large population might show several smokestacks in its CITY DISPLAY.
The exact proportion of smokestacks produced by industrial pollution and smog depends on the difficulty level at which you set the game.
Certain city improvements can help the situation.
A Nuclear Power Plant, Hydro Power Plant, Solar Plant, or Recycling Center improvement in a city reduces the impact of industrial pollution, in turn decreasing the accumulation of smokestacks.
Solar Plants also help prevent global warming by absorbing excess heat in the atmosphere.
The Hoover Dam, a modern Wonder of the World, acts as a Hydro Power Plant for all friendly cities.
The Mass Transit improvement eliminates smog.
NUCLEAR CONTAMINATION .
The detonation of nuclear weapons or the meltdown of a Nuclear Power Plant can also cause contamination.
For game purposes, Civilization II treats these threats identically to industrial pollution, though in real life their effects might be considerably longer term.
NUCLEAR WEAPONS .
A Nuclear unit not only destroys the army or city it targets, but all units stacked with the target, and those in adjacent squares as well.
It also pollutes a number of map squares around the impact square.
Enemy units’ zones of control (which are discussed under Movement Restrictions) might make it impossible for your Settlers or Engineer units to clean up this contamination in a timely fashion, and your rival might not spend the time or manpower.
Unchecked pollution significantly raises the risk of a global warming disaster.
NUCLEAR MELTDOWN .
If a Nuclear Power Plant melts down, half of the city’s population is destroyed.
Additionally, some random number of squares near the city become polluted.
The risk of meltdown always exists when a city which has a Nuclear Power Plant goes into civil disorder.
Civilian unrest might result in safety procedures becoming so lax that a catastrophic accident occurs.
If you build Nuclear Power Plants in any of your cities, take special care not to allow those cities to go into disorder.
When your civilization achieves the technological advance of Fusion Power, the risk of meltdown disappears.
Your Nuclear Plants automatically convert to fusion-powered facilities once you have achieved this advance.
POLLUTION’S EFFECTS .
Pollution is represented graphically by a skull on the terrain square in which it occurs.
It reduces the production of food, raw materials, and trade to one-half (rounded up) of pre- pollution levels.
For example, a square where workers produced four food, one shield, and two trade before pollution blighted the square yields only two food, one shield, and one trade after contamination.
Once the terrain is detoxified, workers’ production returns to pre-pollution levels.
Polluted terrain can be detoxified by any Settlers or Engineer unit.
The working unit’s shield is marked with a “P” to note it has been ordered to detoxify a polluted square.
After four turns of work (an Engineer can clean up in two), the pollution disappears.
Adding more Settlers or Engineer units to a polluted square speeds the cleanup.
If you use the GOTO CITY order, your city list marks which locations suffer from pollution.
Note that a polluted square within the radius overlap of two cities is listed once for each city; if your cities are close together, this might give you an alarming overstatement of the total pollution your civilization suffers.
MONITORING POLLUTION .
Your environmental advisors inform you immediately when any map square within your territory becomes polluted.
A skull appears on the polluted square.
You can monitor the extent of pollution throughout your civilization by watching the pollution indicator, a small icon in the STATUS window.
The color of the icon depends on the number of currently polluted terrain squares and the number of turns they have remained contaminated.
It indicates the extent of the risk of global warming.
GLOBAL WARMING .
Global warming might occur at any time that at least nine map squares, anywhere in the world, are polluted.
The probability that it will occur increases with the length of time contamination on this scale is left untreated.
If polluted terrain is left unattended for too long, environmental damage occurs, as detailed under Disasters.
Once an environmental disaster has occurred, the cycle starts over again.
The planet achieves equilibrium at the new, higher temperatures.
If pollution continues or increases once more to high levels, another bout of environmental problems might occur.
This cycle can repeat endlessly if pollution is not controlled.
MINOR TRIBES .
Thatch-roofed hut icons scattered about the map of the world indicate the presence of minor tribe villages.
These populations are too isolated, too unorganized, or too migratory to develop into major civilizations.
Minor tribes react to contact with a range of emotions, from delight to hostility.
There is no way to predict a village’s response, but most potential responses are favorable.
There is one unique situation: Air units cannot encounter minor tribe villages.
Instead, their overflight scares the villagers, and the hut icon vanishes as the tribe abandons their territory in terror.
Playtesters and Civilization fans alike call these hut icons “goody huts.”
Here’s what might happen when you move a ground unit onto terrain that a minor tribe occupies.
• Occasionally a minor tribe is sufficiently advanced, yet awed by your emissary, to immediately form a new city and become part of your civilization.
• On the other hand, your unit might have stumbled upon a village which has discovered an advance unknown to your civilization.
Graciously, they share their knowledge.
• To placate your emissary unit, a village might give your civilization valuable resources (gold) as a gift.
The gift is added to your treasury.
• Your emissary unit stirs up the young bloods in the village with his tales of valor and victory.
All the impressionable warriors run off to join your army, creating a new military unit “carrying your colors.”
• Your emissary makes a horrible faux pas, and the minor tribe turns vicious.
A random number of barbarian units comes boiling out of the terrain squares that adjoin the village.
Duck (or run, if you can)!
• Your emissary arrives at a spot rumored to contain a village only to find the inhabitants long gone and the dwellings empty.
Nothing occurs.
• Your unit catches up with a particularly peripatetic tribe, and impresses them with his or her goods and possessions.
The minor tribe is willing to join your civilization, though not necessarily interested in settling in their present location.
The villagers become a Settlers (or Engineer) unit carrying your shield.
MOVEMENT .
There are two basic methods of moving units a square or two at a time: by keyboard commands or (if you have enabled mouse movement) by mouse clicks.
The keyboard method uses the eight edge keys of the numeric keypad.
The 5 key in the center is inactive; think of it as your unit’s position.
The keys surrounding the 5 represent the points of a compass.
For example pressing 7 sends your unit northwest, while pressing 6 sends your unit east.
The mouse method involves placing your mouse cursor near the edge of the unit in the direction you want it to travel.
When the cursor turns into an arrow pointing in the appropriate direction, click the left mouse button to make the unit move.
Note that this method works only if you turn on the MOVE UNITS W/ MOUSE option in GAME OPTIONS.
You can also use the GOTO order to send a unit over long distances, as we explain in detail under GoTo Orders.
Units can move up to the limit of their movement factors, with a few caveats.
The most important exception is that a unit can always move at least one square in a turn, regardless of the movement point cost of the terrain.
Are we saying a unit can always move?
Not quite.
An enemy unit or city’s presence can hamstring any unit with the zone of control restriction, as you’ll see in a moment.
There are other, common-sense restrictions on where units can move and where they can’t, which are elaborated under Movement Restrictions.
Back to movement factors.
A unit with a movement factor greater than one must compare its movement factor with the movement point cost of the terrain square you wish it to enter.
The unit pays the movement point cost (subtracts the movement point cost from its remaining movement factor) for each new square it enters, until you choose to stop advancing, or the unit’s movement factor is smaller than the movement point cost of the terrain square.
There’s a small chance that a unit can enter a square, even if its movement factor is lower than the movement point cost of the terrain, which is why sometimes Chariots can cross Mountains squares, and sometimes they can’t.
When an army is unable to complete a movement order because it doesn’t have enough movement points to proceed, its movement is finished for the turn.
The map then centers on the next active unit.
Roads and railroads speed the movement of ground units.
They do this by lowering the movement point cost of the terrain over which they are built.
Any terrain square with a road across it costs just one-third of a movement point to cross.
Any terrain square with a railroad costs no movement points to cross — zero!
Cities automatically have roads in their city squares, so entering a city square always costs one-third of a movement point.
Once your civilization discovers the Railroad advance, city squares are automatically upgraded to railroads, so your units can slide through them for free.
THE ACTIVE UNIT .
How do you know whose turn it is?
Every turn, Civilization II activates each unit in turn by centering the map around the unit and making it blink.
You can give orders to each unit as it becomes the active unit (see the Orders Menu in Reference: Screen by Screen).
Five special orders deserve fuller explanations here.
NO ORDERS .
To skip a unit for the turn, press the SKIP TURN z key or choose the option from the ORDERS menu.
Once you’ve skipped a unit’s turn, the troops are on liberty for the day — you can’t recall them to duty again this turn.
GOTO ORDERS .
To send a unit on a long trek, you have two options.
You can click-and-hold on any square on the map until your cursor turns into a crooked “Go” arrow.
If the destination square isn’t visible in the MAP window, you can use the ZOOM OUT button to enlarge the area you are viewing, click on the WORLD window to shift your view to another area of the map, or switch to VIEW PIECES mode by pressing the V key or choosing the option from the VIEW menu, and move the cursor with the number pad keys.
If you’d rather send a unit to a city, you can press the GOTO G key or choose the option from the ORDERS menu.
A screen pops up listing all of your cities; click on the ALL PLAYERS button to see every destination city in the world.
Once a destination is established, the unit automatically “goes to” that square, whether it takes only one turn to complete its orders, or many turns.
If the unit is attacked, or an obstruction prevents the unit from completing its journey, it becomes active once again.
Ground units cannot travel between continents on a GOTO order.
WAIT ORDERS .
To skip a unit temporarily, press the WAIT W key or choose that option from the ORDERS menu.
This passes you on to the next unit and sends the skipped army to the end of the line.
You’ll see this unit again after all the others have had a chance to move.
PARADROP ORDERS .
Paratroopers that have not moved this turn have the special ability to make paradrops when in a city or Airbase.
Press the PARADROP P key or choose the option from the ORDERS menu.
Your cursor turns into a parachute.
You can make a paradrop in any land square within ten of the origination square, that is not occupied by enemy troops.
As you run the mouse over the map, the cursor changes from a parachute to a crossed-out parachute to indicate “illegal” destination squares.
Click on a square to make the drop.
Paratroopers have one movement point after they drop to attack or change position.
AIRLIFT ORDERS .
Once your civilization has discovered the Radio advance, you can build Airport improvements.
Once you have two or more Airports, you can airlift one unit per turn into or out of each Airport.
Activate a unit in a city, then press the AIRLIFT key L or choose the option from the ORDERS menu.
A list of cities with Airports appears, and you can select your destination.
Enemy Fighters and Stealth Fighters within range of either the target or destination city have a chance to scramble and interdict the airlift.
ACTIVATING FORTIFIED AND SLEEPING UNITS .
Fortified and sleeping units do not become the active unit.
If you want them to move or change position, you must activate them first.
Click the mouse pointer on the square in which fortified or sleeping units are stationed.
This opens a box displaying all units in that square.
Click again on the icons of all units you wish to activate.
Fortified or sleeping units within a city must be activated from within the CITY DISPLAY — see City Display for instructions on how to do this.
Sleeping units automatically activate when enemy units move into an adjacent square.
NAVIGATING THE MAP WINDOW .
We’ve talked about moving your units around the map, but there are several tools which allow you to look at different map areas and move around the game world.
First, let’s describe the two modes of Civilization II.
In MOVE PIECES mode, the active unit blinks, and you can use the number pad keys or cursor arrows to move it across the map.
In VIEW PIECES mode, the square-outline cursor blinks, and you can use the number pad keys to move it across the map.
You are automatically placed in MOVE PIECES mode at the beginning of each turn, and automatically switched to VIEW PIECES mode when “end of turn” is flashing.
Toggle between the modes by pressing the V key (or selecting your choice on the VIEW menu).
You cannot switch to MOVE PIECES mode unless there are units still waiting to move.
Of course, you can simply click on a map square to center the MAP window there.
If you want to move a long distance, you can use the ZOOM buttons to increase the acreage shown in the window, or click on the WORLD window.
If your cursor is over a unit, stack of units, or city square in VIEW PIECES mode, you can press the ACTIVATE UNIT A key to activate some or all of the units in that square.
If there is more than one unit, a pop-up box allows you to choose among them.
If the active unit in MOVE PIECES mode happens to be standing in a city, the ACTIVATE UNIT key also works to activate any fellow units in the city, without opening the CITY DISPLAY.
MOVEMENT RESTRICTIONS .
Most of the restrictions placed on unit movement are a matter of common sense, as we mentioned earlier.
We’re spelling them all out here, in case you try to order a unit somewhere that seems possible and the game won’t let you do it.
GROUND UNITS .
Ground units (all non-ship and non-air units) normally move only on land.
To traverse the wide (or narrow) oceans or even to get across lakes, they must board naval transport.
Not all ships take passengers; see Naval Units under Mobile Units for a list of those that do.
Boarding a ship uses up all a unit’s movement points for the turn and puts it to sleep.
If you attempt to move a naval unit into a land square that does not contain a port city, any passengers are offered the option to MAKE LANDFALL and disembark.
If a naval unit carrying ground troops makes port, all passengers automatically wake up.
NAVAL UNITS .
Ships normally move only on the ocean, although they can also sail across inland lakes.
Ships cannot navigate rivers, deltas, or swamps in the game, though of course some do in real life.
Instead, river navigation is represented by the reduced movement point cost for ground units following riverbeds.
City squares that touch a shoreline along one side or at one corner are the only “land” squares that ships can enter — here they make port.
Making port costs one movement point.
AIR UNITS .
Air units can cross both land and sea squares at a cost of one movement point per square, but they must land in a friendly city, at an Airbase, or on a Carrier unit to refuel every turn or two.
Though planes can sometimes fly above rival ground units in real life without causing an incident, they are always required to encounter enemy ground units that they overfly in Civilization II.
To avoid attacking rival units by accident, carefully guide your planes around them.
Air units have the advantage in maneuverability.
Neither ground nor ship units can attack air units that appear “next to them” because of the disparate vertical locations.
The one exception is the Diplomat or Spy unit’s ability to bribe adjacent units into switching sides.
See Diplomats & Spies below.
ZONES OF CONTROL .
Ground units cannot move directly from one square adjacent to an enemy army or city to another such square.
The squares that surround a unit are in that unit’s zone of control — the same holds true for a city.
Neither ground troops nor Settlers units can move directly from one rival’s zone of control into another square within a rival’s zone of control.
The prohibited square might be adjacent to the first enemy army, to another army (even one from a different civilization), or to any enemy city.
Ground units can only move into such a controlled square if a friendly unit or city already occupies the square, or if you have formed an alliance with a rival player (which we’ll explain fully in Diplomacy).
Some units have special abilities which allow them to ignore zones of control.
Air units have the whole sky in which to maneuver; naval units have the open sea.
Diplomats and Spies use social convention and diplomatic immunity with equal aplomb, and Caravans and Freight units can argue neutrality and engineer special deliveries.
Partisans use intimate knowledge of the local terrain to good effect.
Explorers’ solitary nature and singleness of purpose get them out of tight places, and Engineers’ training includes techniques to infiltrate and bypass enemy positions.
The Movement Restrictions diagram offers a graphic representation of a unit confronted by enemy zones of control.
Civilization Advances .
The major dynamic of change throughout the history of civilization has been the continuing advance and accumulation of knowledge.
As humankind progressed by fits and starts through the ages, civilizations rose and fell, their success or failure due to what knowledge they acquired and how they employed it.
Those who first acquire new knowledge are often able to employ it to build a more powerful position, but there are many cases of civilizations that obtained some new invention first, then failed to use it to their advantage.
The pace at which a society develops and implements new knowledge depends on many factors, including its social organization, economic organization, geographic location, leadership, and competition.
The concept of progress being not only inevitable, but even a good thing is a relatively recent phenomenon.
Only in the last several hundred years have we actively studied history and considered the evidence of the historical record.
For most of human history, the pace of progress was so slow as to be barely detectable but since the Industrial Revolution, the pace of advance and change has dramatically increased.
Rapid change is now considered normal.
For much of the world, new discoveries are continually expected and are not a surprise.
THE CONCEPT OF CIVILIZATION ADVANCES .
As we said in City Management Concepts, scientific research is what drives your civilization’s scientific and intellectual growth.
The science (beaker icons) each city generates every turn represents a percentage of the total trade, that city brings in.
You can adjust the amount of science generated with the TAX RATE option in the KINGDOM menu.
A low science ratio generates advances slowly; a high ratio generates them more quickly.
You want to accumulate research, in the form of beakers, to gain advances, or new technologies.
Each new advance allows your civilization to build new units or city improvements; sometimes a new advance makes possible the construction of a new Wonder of the World.
Each new civilization advance also opens up a path to researching further technologies.
You could look at the connections between advances as a flow chart (see the Poster for an example), as a web, or as a tree.
The important concept is that each technology is a building block that allows research into further advances.
You can even research into the realms of science fiction; each futuristic advance you discover adds bonus points to your final score, as we’ll explain in Future Technology, coming right up.
Accumulated research isn’t the only way to gain advances.
Contact with a minor tribe might also net you a new civilization advance — see Minor Tribes for all the possible outcomes of an encounter.
Finally, parley with other civilizations can result in an option to exchange technologies, and war offers the opportunity to wrest them by force from cities you subjugate.
We’ll give you the full details under Diplomacy.
The scientific research performed in each city you own is totaled in the SCIENCE ADVISOR’s Report (see The Advisor Menu in Reference: Screen by Screen for more about the Science Advisor and his duties).
Each new advance that your civilization discovers “costs” a certain amount of science (accumulation of beakers).
As time progresses, new advances require more funding to research.
The SCIENCE ADVISOR’s Report also lists the technologies you have already discovered or been given, and the current advance your scientists are researching.
CLIMBING THE TECHNOLOGY TREE .
Once your civilization begins to accumulate scientific research, your Science Advisor asks you to choose a new civilization advance to research.
Before making your choice, you can immediately get help concerning the available technologies.
Press the GOAL button to see a list of all the advances in the game.
Select the one you’re most interested in pursuing, and click OK to find out which of the options you now have will further your research toward your goal.
A message informs you if none of the options is suitable.
Technologies you should be able to research but that are not on the current list of possibilities eventually show up (at a later choice-point).
Once you have chosen a direction for your research, you cannot change your mind.
Your scientists pursue that topic until they learn the new civilization advance.
If you are unfamiliar with the advantages of a particular advance, highlight it and click on the HELP button to see the CIVILOPEDIA entry.
Advances are divided into five broad categories: Military, Economic, Social, Academic, and Applied.
The icons in front of each advance show which category each advance belongs to.
They can help you decide which advance will further your general strategy if you are, for instance, following a militaristic path, rather than an economic one.
These icons also appear in the diplomatic screens, to help summarize the technology paths of your opponents.
When research is complete, your chief investigator announces the discovery.
The CIVILOPEDIA screen appears detailing the impact of the advance, including any new units, city improvements, and Wonders that have become available.
The PRODUCTION menus in each CITY DISPLAY are immediately revised to include these new items wherever they are appropriate (for instance, inland cities can never build ships, so ship units never appear on their PRODUCTION menus, even if you have discovered Navigation or later seafaring advances).
As each new advance is acquired, your advisor appears again to ask for a new topic to research.
The list of choices is updated with each new discovery to reflect your growing knowledge base.
Technologies you acquire through means other than research (see Diplomats & Spies and Minor Tribes for details) no longer appear on the list of choices — you’ve already discovered them.
If by chance you’re given the civilization advance your scientists are currently researching, your Science Advisor immediately switches the research effort to a new topic of your choice — the accumulated beakers that represent research into the gift advance are transferred to the new topic.
SPECIAL ADVANCE EFFECTS .
A number of the advances in Civilization II have effects independent of the new units and improvements you can build.
We’ll summarize these effects here.
Each advance’s CIVILOPEDIA entry reminds you of these effects.
• Achieving the Corporation advance allows you to focus a city’s production on revenue.
The discovery of the Corporation advance allows your citizens to “build” the Capitalization improvement, and market a city’s research to produce high-tech consumer goods that generate tax income.
• The discovery of the Democracy advance allows each Courthouse improvement to make one content citizen happy.
• Once your civilization discovers the Electronics advance, your Colosseums can make four unhappy people content in each city, not just three.
• The discovery of Fusion Power eliminates the possibility of a meltdown in your Nuclear Power Plants.
In addition, it gives the Thrust Components of your spaceship 25 percent more power.
• Both Navigation and Seafaring reduce the chance of your Trireme units being lost at sea.
• Once your culture has embraced the Nuclear Power advance, all of your Naval units gain one extra movement point.
• If you discover the Philosophy advance before any other civilization has done so, you earn a “free” advance.
• Once your civilization has achieved the Railroad advance, all your city squares are automatically upgraded from roads to railroads.
It no longer costs any movement points to enter cities.
• Once your civilization has achieved the Refrigeration advance, all your city squares are automatically upgraded from irrigated land to farmland, if the terrain is suitable.
Once you build the Supermarket improvement, your workers can harvest 50 percent more food from these spaces.
• The discovery of Theology makes your Cathedrals more influential.
Instead of making three unhappy people per city content, a Cathedral now relieves four.
There is one disadvantageous special effect.
Once you discover the advance of Communism, the effect of the Cathedral improvement (which discovering the Monotheism advance allows you to build) is lessened.
Instead of making three unhappy people per city content, a Cathedral now only relieves two.
If your culture has discovered both Theology and Communism, the special effects cancel each other.
Wonders of the world .
A Wonder of the World is a dramatic, awe-inspiring accomplishment.
It is typically a great achievement of engineering, science, or the arts, representing a milestone in the history of humankind.
As your civilization progresses through the years, certain advances make building Wonders of the World possible.
Twenty-eight Wonders are included in Civilization II, seven each representing the four great epochs of civilization: the Ancient World, the Renaissance (including the High Middle Ages), the Industrial Revolution, and the Modern World (present and future).
These Wonders are the extraordinary monuments of a civilization, bringing everlasting glory and other benefits to their owners.
THE CONCEPT OF WONDERS .
Wonders of the World are like extraordinary city improvements, in that they are structures (or achievements) that your civilization can undertake to “build.”
Unlike city improvements, each Wonder is unique, existing only in the city where it is constructed.
Each one confers a specific, unique benefit on the civilization that owns it (you can find the specifics in the CIVILOPEDIA listing for each Wonder).
If one of your cities is captured by a rival power, and you had built a Wonder there, that Wonder no longer benefits your civilization.
Instead, its bonuses now apply to the conquering civilization.
The same holds true if your units capture a city containing a Wonder from a rival player.
If a Wonder is destroyed by the decimation of the city in which it stood, it can never be rebuilt.
Its benefits are lost to the world forever.
Further, some of the glories of the ancient and Renaissance Wonders dim over time.
Objects and accomplishments that awed the ancients lose their luster for people of the Modern Age.
The achievement of later advances can negate the benefits of older Wonders, regardless of whether your civilization or another discovers the canceling advance.
CONSTRUCTING WONDERS .
You can build a Wonder only if you have discovered the advance that makes it possible, and if it does not already exist somewhere else in the world (if it exists in another city, it won’t appear as an option on your PRODUCTION menu).
However, you can start construction of a Wonder even if another civilization is working on the same project — you just race to see who gets done first.
A message warns you if another civilization’s production of a Wonder is imminent.
If you are building a Wonder in one of your cities and the same Wonder is completed elsewhere before you finish, you must convert your production to something else.
Any excess shields you have accumulated beyond the number required to construct your new project are lost, so be careful what you choose.
As you click on each potential project, you see a graphic representation of the shortfall or excess of shields you currently have with respect to the new project’s requirements.
Wonders are not destroyed when an enemy captures the city in which they exist.
However, if a city possessing a Wonder is destroyed (that is, if its population is reduced to zero by siege or bombardment), that Wonder is lost forever and cannot be rebuilt.
Wonders of the World are often long-term projects (as befits their magnificence).
If you want to accomplish construction of a Wonder faster than the city that is building it can generate shields, you have several options.
You can divert trade goods into the Wonder’s coffers by moving a Caravan or Freight unit into the city of construction and accepting the choice HELP BUILD WONDER — see Caravans & Freight for details about Caravan interactions.
You can also spend cash directly from your treasury.
Click the BUY button at the top of the PRODUCTION menu; if you have enough cash on hand to purchase the Wonder, you can choose to pay, and the Wonder will be completed next turn.
In addition, you can disband troops currently in the city that is constructing the Wonder.
Each disbanded unit contributes shields equal to one-half its construction cost directly to the RESOURCE BOX, representing the reallocation of support from the unit to the construction.
Wonders can be built in any city and more than one may be built in the same city.
Each Wonder has both specific and general benefits.
You can read about the specific benefits in the appropriate CIVILOPEDIA entry.
The glory that accrues to your civilization for possessing a Wonder is one of the general benefits conferred by such great works; more importantly, this glory continues to accrue even if new advances make the Wonder’s specific benefit obsolete.
In addition, each Wonder that your civilization possesses adds to your Civilization II score.
The presence of Wonders is significant to the calculations determining the top five cities in the world.
Further, the presence of Wonders influences historians, such as Gibbon, who periodically rate the world’s civilizations.
Finally, Wonders also sway your people to improve your throne room (see Throne Room for the particulars).
UNITS .
Units are groups of citizens, soldiers, and envoys that can move around the world of Civilization II and interact with other units and civilizations.
Some non-combat units, like Caravans, Explorers, and Settlers, have special functions which are explained separately.
UNIT CONCEPTS .
Units are the pieces you move around on the map in Civilization II.
Each civilization’s units carry a different color shield.
Units carrying red shields are always barbarians.
Units can be divided into types according to the way they move: ground (or land) units, air units, and naval (or sea) units.
Each unit has statistics for attack strength, defense strength, and movement points.
These stats are listed in a shorthand, code-like set of numbers, which we’ve already mentioned is called the ADM — this stands for Attack/Defense/Movement.
You can find each unit’s ADM numbers in the CIVILOPEDIA.
In addition, each unit — even non-combat units — has statistics for hit points and firepower, which are also found in the CIVILOPEDIA.
The strength bar at the top of a unit’s shield indicates how many hit points that unit currently has, both by its length and by its color.
Attack strength shows the likelihood of inflicting damage when attacking an opponent.
Units with a high attack strength are useful for offensives in which they are attacking.
Defense strength represents the ability of a unit to defend itself when attacked; it is the likelihood that damage will be inflicted on an attacking unit.
Units with high defense strength are useful for defending cities and other positions against enemy troops.
The terrain on which a unit stands can increase its defensive strength, as you’ll find in Terrain & Movement.
Movement points indicate how far a unit can travel — or how many times a unit can attack — in a turn; they’re explained in detail in Terrain & Movement, too.
Hit points indicate how much damage a unit can withstand before it is destroyed.
Units with a greater number of hit points can absorb more damage in combat.
A green strength bar indicates that a unit has more than two-thirds of its hit points remaining, a yellow strength bar means the unit has between one-third and two-thirds of its hit points, and a red strength bar show that a unit has less than one-third of its total hit points remaining.
Hit points can be restored by skipping turns, especially in cities with repair facilities.
Firepower indicates how much damage a unit can inflict in a round of combat.
Units with a high firepower pack a powerful wallop.
A unit’s status is important when you want to give it orders.
Units can be on active status, which means they blink each time they become the active unit.
Units on sleep status remain inactive until an enemy unit comes within one square of them.
At this point, they “wake up” and become active.
Units on fortified status are also inactive (their status is indicated by the letter “F” on the unit’s shield, and by the brown “entrenchment” icon which appears around the base of the unit — in fact, they are entrenched in a defensive posture.
They remain inactive even if rival units approach them.
Clicking on either a sleeping or fortified unit allows you to change its status to active.
When the unit becomes the active unit, you can give it new orders.
Every unit has an observation factor.
Most units can only “see” units and objects on the edges of the terrain squares directly adjacent to their own.
Early in the game, when most of the map is black, the limits of this observation area are obvious, as the blackness rolls back only so far with each move a unit makes.
Even after you have explored a continent, barbarians and rival units can appear “out of nowhere” because they are lingering outside the limits of your units’ observation.
Some advanced units have greater observation factors.
They can “see” into a second square in all directions, which makes them useful for monitoring rival’s movements and anticipating surprise attacks.
Exceptional observation factors are noted in unit descriptions in the CIVILOPEDIA.
MILITARY UNITS .
Through the years, the majority of your time is spent moving and positioning armies.
A strong military is the best defense against rivals and barbarians.
Military units are also the eyes of your civilization, exploring the world as they move.
Finally, they can serve you offensively by defeating the armies of your rivals and capturing their cities.
Armies can be ground units (Legions, Cannons, and Armor, for example), naval units (Triremes, Ironclads, Battleships, etc.), or air units (Fighters, Bombers, and Nuclear units).
Several non-combat units need further explanation, so they’re discussed in detail a little later.
All units, whether they are combat or non-combat oriented, are described in the MILITARY UNITS option of the CIVILOPEDIA.
GROUND UNITS .
The majority of Civilization II’s units are ground units.
These armies move over the map terrain square by terrain square.
They spend movement points according to the type of terrain they are entering, observe movement restrictions like zones of control, and attack rival units when you move them into a square containing an enemy army.
Most ground units have an observation of one square.
PILLAGE .
Armies can strip the countryside through which they roam of any improvements any Settlers or Engineer units have built, tearing up roads, trampling crops, and collapsing mines.
The occupying army destroys your choice of one improvement each time you press the s and P keys simultaneously, or choose PILLAGE from the ORDERS menu.
It takes one turn to pillage one improvement.
AIR UNITS .
Air units operate under some special movement rules.
These units can cross any terrain square at a cost of one movement point per square.
Because they are airborne, they get no bonus for crossing squares improved by roads or railroads.
All air units except missiles have an observation range of two squares in any terrain.
Most air units must end their movement in a friendly city with an airport, at an Airbase, or on a Carrier unit, as these are the only areas where they can safely land.
Bombers and Stealth Bombers must land for refueling every second turn, giving them effective ranges of 16 (8 out and 8 back) and 24 (12 out and 12 back), respectively.
Bombers and Stealth Bombers can only attack once, regardless of their remaining movement points.
In addition, attacking uses all a unit’s remaining movement points for the turn.
Therefore, if you attack during a Bomber or Stealth Bomber’s return flight, it does not have enough movement points to return home safely, and it crashes and disappears.
Fighters and Stealth Fighters can attack targets as many times as they have movement points.
However, be sure you save enough movement after the attack to return to a landing area, or your pilots kamikaze!
Both missile units are one-shot attackers; the icons represent missiles that are spent in the aggression.
If you have miscounted the number of squares to your destination, or another unit’s movement or position prevents a missile unit from reaching a target city or unit, you can attempt to return the missile to a friendly city or Airbase, or to a Submarine or Carrier unit.
If your missile gets stranded — that is, there is no target unit or city within reach, and no safe landing area — the missile is a dud that falls to earth harmlessly.
It disappears from the game.
If a city is the target of a Cruise missile attack, the strongest military unit defends against it (the unit in that city with the largest defense factor).
There is no collateral damage to city improvements from Cruise missile attacks.
If a city is the target of a Nuclear missile attack, half of the population is destroyed.
All military units in and adjacent to the target square are destroyed as well, regardless of the civilization to which they belong.
If a military unit or stack of units is the target, all units in the stack are destroyed.
In addition to the loss of units, all land terrain squares adjacent to the impact square become polluted.
Helicopters are unique air units in that they don’t need to return to a base for refueling, giving them an unlimited movement range similar to a ground unit.
However, every turn a Helicopter starts in the field — not taking off from a friendly city, Airbase or Carrier — it suffers a small amount of damage.
Eventually, it must return to a friendly city or Airbase for repairs.
A Helicopter can only make one attack per turn; attacking uses all remaining movement points for that turn.
NAVAL UNITS .
Naval units also adhere to some special rules.
Some naval units have the capacity to carry passengers — ground units.
These include Triremes, Caravels, Galleons, Frigates, and Transports.
Carriers can only transport air units.
Submarines can only transport missile units.
When two ships occupy the same square, the one that leaves first takes up to its carrying capacity of passenger units with it.
Most naval units can conduct shore bombardments — that is, they can attack units standing on the coastal squares of continents and islands.
Because of the high degree of inaccuracy, the firepower of both the ship and its target is reduced to one when a ship bombards a unit, city, or stack on shore.
Submarine and Transport units cannot conduct shore bombardments at all.
Battleships, Carriers, Cruisers, Destroyers, and Submarines have enhanced observation ranges at sea.
Each can “see” enemy ships and planes from two ocean squares away.
Rival Submarine units are the only exception to this rule, as their ability to travel underwater camouflages them from most units’ view (it likewise conceals your Subs from your enemies), unless the Submarine is attacking the observing unit.
Destroyers, Cruisers, AEGIS Cruisers, and Helicopters can all spot Submarines if they are adjacent to them.
Note that Submarines cannot spot rival Submarines!
COMBAT .
Combat occurs when a unit attempts to enter a map square occupied by a unit or city of another civilization — unless the unit is a Diplomat or Spy, in which case it can offer bribes to units or conduct a variety of business in cities — or unless the unit is a Caravan or Freight unit, in which case it can establish a trade route when it enters a city.
Everybody else just fights.
Battles are immediately resolved.
Most battles result in the destruction of one army or the other.
When more than one unit occupies the defender’s square, the unit with the highest defensive strength (as determined by comparing the second digit in the units’ ADM numbers, and making allowance for veteran status) defends.
If it loses, then all other armies stacked with it are destroyed as well.
However, stacked units taking advantage of Fortress improvements or taking cover in city squares are destroyed one at a time.
THE EFFECT OF DAMAGE .
Successful attackers which have movement points remaining after combat can continue moving — and even continue attacking — normally, if they choose.
However, successful attackers often sustain damage in each battle.
As a unit is damaged, its strength bar gets shorter, and eventually changes color.
Both the length of the strength bar and the color are significant.
When a unit is reduced to approximately two-thirds of its full strength, the strength bar changes from green to yellow.
When a unit’s hit points are reduced to around one-third of its full strength, the bar changes from yellow to red.
In addition to losing strength, damaged units also lose mobility.
A unit’s damage is factored into its movement allowance, so a unit which has sustained damage of 30 percent only has 70 percent of its movement points.
For example, if the damaged unit normally had three movement points, damage of 30 percent would reduce its movement to two (even though it would still have a green strength bar).
There are two important exceptions to this rule: Naval units are never reduced below two movement points per turn, and air units do not suffer reduced movement at all.
CALCULATING THE WINNER .
Combat in Civilization II is essentially like a rapid-fire boxing match.
Units fight one-on- one in rounds, with damage equal to the firepower of the winner being subtracted from the hit points of the loser of each round.
When one unit loses all its hit points, it is destroyed.
If the loser is defending a stack of units and they are not inside a Fortress or a city, the whole stack is destroyed.
The important factors in combat are the attack and defense strengths of the combatants as well as their hit points and firepower; the presence of veteran units on either side; the terrain occupied by the defender; and any defensive improvements in the square.
In addition to considering all of these factors, combat also includes an element of chance.
Imagine that sometimes, a unit just gets lucky.
We don’t want to drag you through lots of heavy arithmetic for each combination of factors, but the calculations for each round of combat can be boiled down to a simple comparison.
The total modified attack and defense factors are combined and the probability of either side winning is approximately the ratio of each side’s factor compared to this total.
For example, if an Elephant (attack factor 4) attacks a Phalanx (defense factor 2), the total of the factors is 6 (4 + 2).
The Elephant has about a 66 percent chance of winning (4 out of 6) and the Phalanx about a 33 percent chance (2 out of 6).
Both the Elephant and the Phalanx have ten hit points and a firepower of one, so the battle goes between ten and nineteen rounds, until one or the other unit is reduced to zero hit points.
It is possible for one opponent to win every round and take no damage at all, and it is possible for the opponents to trade damage for damage until even the eventual winner is badly beaten up.
Most combats fall somewhere in the middle.
ADDING IN ADJUSTMENTS .
How do those adjustments for veteran status and terrain and so on work?
They’re added into each factor they affect before the total is determined.
For instance, if both units are veterans, each gets a 50 percent bonus to attack and defense, giving the Elephant an attack factor of 6 (4 + 2) and the Phalanx a defense factor of 3 (2 + 1).
Of course, modifying each unit’s factors also changes the total: Instead of 6, it is 9 (the total of each modified factor, 6 + 3).
Now the odds are close to 6 out of 9 for the Elephant and about 3 out of 9 for the Phalanx.
If both are veterans and the Phalanx is behind City Walls (which triples a unit’s defense factor, making the veteran Phalanx a 9), the odds are about 6 out of 15 for the Elephant and close to 9 out of 15 for the Phalanx.
Though the adjustments change the odds of each unit winning a single round, they have no affect on the total number of rounds or on the amount of damage inflicted.
There are a number of special combat situations, which have special rules, detailed below.
AIR BATTLES .
Only Fighters and Stealth Fighters can attack Bomber or Stealth Bomber units.
In fact, Bombers and Stealth Bombers prevent enemy units (other than Fighters and Stealth Fighters) from even entering, much less attacking, the square they occupy.
When a Fighter or Stealth Fighter attacks a Helicopter unit, the Helicopter’s disadvantage is represented by reducing its firepower to one and reducing its defense factor by 50 percent.
When a Fighter or Stealth Fighter is stationed in a city that is attacked by a Bomber or Stealth Bomber, the defending units scramble, gaining a defense factor four times their normal value.
However, they gain no additional protection from SAM Missile Batteries (because the SAMs don’t want to down their own planes).
AIR DEFENSE .
When an AEGIS Cruiser is attacked by air units, it gains defense bonuses: The defense factor is tripled against plane or Helicopter attacks, and it is increased five times against missile attacks.
CITY ATTACKS .
A successful ground attack on a city destroys only one defending unit at a time.
However, each successful attack also reduces the population of the city by one point unless the city is protected by City Walls.
Population loss does not result from naval or air attack, but is caused by a Nuclear strike.
CITY DEFENSES .
The City Walls improvement triples the defense strength of units within against all ground units except Howitzers, and it protects a city’s population from reduction.
The Coastal Fortress doubles the defense strength of all units within a city against shore bombardments by enemy ships.
The SAM Missile Battery doubles the defense strength of all units within the city against all air units except Nuclear missiles.
See Nuclear Attacks for the scoop on SDI Defense improvements.
FORTRESSES .
Units within a Fortress gain significant advantages.
A unit stationed within a Fortress doubles its defensive strength, and stacked units are destroyed one at a time.
Settlers or Engineer units can build Fortresses on any terrain square (except a city square) once your civilization has discovered the Construction advance; see Settlers & Engineers for the complete scoop.
NUCLEAR ATTACKS .
Nuclear attacks occur when a Nuclear unit attempts to enter a square occupied by enemy units or an enemy city.
A Spy unit can make a suicide bomber attack by smuggling a Nuclear unit into an enemy city, regardless of the presence of an SDI Defense city improvement.
In any case, all units in the target square and adjacent squares are destroyed, regardless of their cultural allegiance (in other words, both theirs and yours).
In addition, a bombed city loses half of its population.
The defense against most nuclear attacks is the SDI Defense city improvement.
An SDI Defense improvement is like an umbrella that extends three squares from a city in any direction.
The city and all units and improvements within this radius (including Airports, Fortresses, and other city squares) are protected from all effects of a direct Nuclear missile attack, other than the suicidal bomber Spy mentioned previously.
PEARL HARBOR .
When air units or ground units attack ships in port (naval units defend a city against air units), the attackers’ firepower is doubled against the defending units and the defender’s firepower is reduced to one, to represent the defenders’ vulnerability.
Air units also pick off city defenders one at a time, except for Nuclear missiles (see Nuclear Attacks, above).
SHORE BOMBARDMENTS .
Other than Submarines, any naval units with an attack factor greater than zero can attack enemy units on adjacent land squares (they are conducting shore bombardments).
Cities along the coastline are vulnerable to shore bombardments, too.
Naval units can defend the cities they occupy against attack, though their firepower is reduced to one because of their limited maneuverability.
CARAVANS & FREIGHT .
Caravan units represent shipments of trade goods and materials.
Though the icon remains a camel, as history progresses, your Caravan units are stand-ins for the continuum of trade vehicles from camel caravans to wagon trains.
They can be used to establish trade routes between cities or to transfer resources for the construction of Wonders of the World.
Caravans become available once you have achieved the advance of Trade.
Once your civilization has discovered The Corporation, the Freight unit replaces the Caravan unit on the PRODUCTION menu.
Freight units have two movement points a turn.
They represent the modern movement of goods and materials by truck convoys and cargo containers.
TRADE ROUTES .
A Caravan or Freight unit can establish a trade route by entering any city, even a rival’s city.
Your treasury gains an immediate cash payment for delivery of the first load of goods, and your research scientists gain an immediate bonus for cultural exchange of an equal amount of science (beakers).
The home city of the Caravan or Freight unit gains an increase in the trade generated each turn, which represents a continuing economic relationship.
A listing in the GENERAL INFORMATION window shows the cities with which trade routes have been established, and the amount of bonus trade generated every turn.
The bonus is added to the total amount of trade your city produces, so that indirectly this boosts your research, tax, and luxury production in that city.
Each city can have up to three functioning trade routes, one for each commodity the city produces.
As each route is established, the commodity traded on that route is enclosed in parentheses, to indicate a successful deal.
Thereafter, when a Caravan is completed, loads of that commodity are no longer available.
Food loads are always available.
The amount of trade generated by a trade route depends greatly on supply and demand, and partly on the size of the two cities.
Bigger cities generate more trade.
Trade with a city from another civilization is of greater value than trade with friendly cities.
The farther apart the two cities are, the greater the bonus for trading between them.
Trade bonuses also increase when the cities are on different continents.
If you capture a rival city with whom you were previously trading, the trade route remains active.
However, the amount of trade it generates is reduced, because items which were once exotic imports have become domestic commodities.
Caravans and Freight can enter any city they can reach.
They are not hampered by movement restrictions like zones of control, but their ADM numbers are low enough that they might find it difficult to smuggle goods into an enemy city without being destroyed.
Caravan and Freight units can take advantage of naval transport to trade overseas (you can load them aboard any ship that carries units), and they can disembark into a city directly from a ship.
SUPPLY & DEMAND .
Each city in the game can supply three commodities because of their local abundance.
Similarly, each demands three other commodities, which are locally in short supply.
While a Caravan or Freight unit can deliver goods to any city, it gains the largest profits from delivering a commodity to a community that demands it.
You can check the marketplace wisdom by clicking the SUPPLY & DEMAND button at the bottom of the TRADE ADVISOR’s Report.
A list of commodities appears.
Choose the commodity in which you’re interested, then click OK.
A second list shows all known cities that supply the item and all known cities that demand it.
The list is updated to reflect your exploration and contact with other cultures.
FOOD CARAVANS .
A fourth and always available option for trade goods is food.
You can transfer one food per turn to another city by sending a load of food from a city with a surplus to a city that needs help.
A needy city can be on the receiving end of more than one food route.
Once a food route is established, it cannot be countermanded.
It is automatically canceled, however, if the sending city runs out of food for its own people.
BUILDING WONDERS .
A Caravan or Freight unit can contribute shields equal to its construction cost to any Wonder of the World you are undertaking.
Simply move your Caravan or Freight unit into the city in which construction of a Wonder is underway.
A dialog box offers you the choice of contributing to the construction.
If you decide to help build the Wonder, your Caravan or Freight unit disappears and its worth is added to the production of the Wonder, speeding its completion.
If you divert goods to help build a Wonder, they are still available later to establish a trade route.
DIPLOMATS & SPIES .
Diplomats are unique units that can act as ambassadors, envoys, secret agents, and saboteurs.
They can open contacts with other civilizations and establish embassies to gather information about your rivals.
They can steal information and otherwise disrupt your rivals.
They can bribe enemy armies.
Stationing Diplomat or Spy units in your own cities reduces the effectiveness of enemy Diplomats and Spies.
When your civilization obtains the advance of Writing, you can build Diplomats.
Be aware that enemy Diplomats can use all the same techniques against your civilization as you use against theirs.
Once your civilization has developed the Espionage advance, the Spy unit replaces the Diplomat unit on the PRODUCTION menu.
A Spy is superior to a Diplomat in several ways.
Her greater sophistication and more elaborate training allows her to choose a specific technology or target improvement when entering a city intent on mischief.
In addition, she can travel more rapidly, moving up to three squares a turn, regardless of the terrain.
A Spy has an observation range of two squares in every direction.
When a Spy successfully completes a mission, she has a chance of escaping and returning to the nearest friendly city.
The easier the mission, the greater the chance that she will escape.
For instance, stealing a random civilization advance is easier than stealing a specific one.
Finally, Spies have the unique ability to plant nuclear devices in enemy cities, as we’ll explain in Entering Enemy Cities.
BRIBING ENEMY UNITS .
You might convince an enemy unit to defect and join your civilization.
Only units of civilizations governed by Democracy are completely immune to bribery.
In game terms, simply move a Diplomat or Spy into a square occupied by a single enemy unit (neither Diplomats nor Spies can bribe units that are stacked together).
A dialog box appears, showing how much gold the unit demands to defect.
If the unit is immune to bribery, a dialog box will remind you of this condition.
The farther a unit is from its capital, the less gold is required.
If you accept, the gold is deducted from your treasury and the army switches sides (becomes your color).
The Diplomat or Spy survives the discussion regardless of his or her success in negotiating; however, if you do not choose to pay the bribe, the enemy unit might attack your negotiator later.
Diplomats and Spies can bribe naval and air units as long as these are not stacked with other units.
The nearest friendly city becomes the home city for a newly bribed unit (see Unit Roster for information on this point).
COUNTERESPIONAGE .
Diplomats and Spies stationed in friendly cities have a chance to thwart “steal technology” attempts by enemy Diplomats and Spies.
Each Diplomat has a 20 percent chance to do so per attempt.
Spies have a 40 percent chance; veteran Spies have a 60 percent chance of catching their fellow envoys.
Getting caught ends the interloper’s turn.
ENTERING ENEMY CITIES .
Diplomats and Spies can slip past enemy armies without pausing to observe zones of control, using superior powers of persuasion and/or diplomatic immunity as a shield.
Diplomats and Spies are also subject to deportation (a special form of “attack”) even from civilizations with which they are not at war.
Any military unit can “attack” a Diplomat or Spy from a civilization with which it is at peace, provided that the envoy is nearer to a city of the military unit’s culture than to one of its own cities.
The offending envoy is returned to friendly territory.
Diplomats and Spies can travel overseas in ships as do other ground units.
Diplomats and Spies are two of only four units that can enter defended enemy cities (Caravans and Freight are the other two).
A menu listing the tasks a Diplomat or Spy can perform appears whenever you send your envoy on an urban mission.
If, after you’ve looked over your choices, you decide not to take any action, click the CANCEL button to back out of the menu.
Each task is fully explained below.
INTERNATIONAL INCIDENTS .
Whenever a Diplomat or Spy successfully steals technology, sabotages a city improvement, poisons the water supply, or incites a revolt in a city of a civilization with whom you have signed a treaty, an international incident almost inevitably occurs.
Your victim is likely to treat your treachery as an act of war, although a victim with whom you are allied may sometimes choose to disregard your act.
In addition, if you are governing your civilization as a Republic or Democracy, there might be domestic repercussions as well.
Your government may collapse into Anarchy when the scandal reaches the Senate floor.
Do not confuse international incidents with a Spy’s ability to escape unharmed after a mission — the two events are completely independent.
The only times when incidents do not occur are when you are already at war with your victim and when the Diplomat or Spy fails in its mission.
INVESTIGATE CITY .
Your Diplomat or Spy unit gathers information about the rival city’s production and development.
In game terms, this option shows you the enemy’s CITY DISPLAY.
You can examine what armies are defending the city and what improvements have been built there.
When you exit the CITY DISPLAY, you return to the MAP window.
Your Diplomat has been eliminated, or your Spy has been charged one-third of a movement point for her efforts.
There is no possibility that your envoy is detected.
Until the end of the turn, you may click on the city again at any time to review the knowledge you have gained.
ESTABLISH EMBASSY .
Your Diplomat or Spy unit establishes official contact with the rival civilization, setting up an office in the city to which you sent him or her.
If you sent a Diplomat, he stays there to head the office, so the icon disappears; if you sent a Spy, she has been charged one-third of a movement point for her efforts.
There is no possibility of international embarrassment.
In game terms, you can access information about your rival’s type of government, treasury, number of armies, the name of its capital city, treaties with other civilizations, diplomatic states, and technological advances whenever you look at your FOREIGN MINISTER’s Report (see Advisors for the complete scoop).
It is only necessary to establish an embassy once with any particular civilization.
STEAL ADVANCE .
Your Diplomat or Spy attempts to steal one civilization advance from a rival civilization.
In game terms, a Diplomat can only confiscate one advance per city.
A Spy can make more than one attempt per city, although her chance of capture increases with every additional mission.
If you send a Spy, she has the option to try the more difficult task of filching a specific advance from the list of unique technologies your rival has.
Even if he succeeds, a Diplomat disappears in the process (his cover is blown).
If she evades capture, a Spy returns to the closest friendly city, and is promoted to veteran status for her work.
While veteran status cannot improve her ADM rating of zero defense, it does increase her chances of escaping detection on later missions.
If you have already stolen a civilization advance from this particular city, or if the enemy civilization has discovered no technology worth stealing, and your envoy is undetected, a Diplomat unit loses its turn but is not destroyed.
If the enemy civilization has discovered no technology worth stealing, a Spy remains empty-handed.
The only way a Spy can fail to steal an advance is if she has opted to confiscate a particular technology.
INDUSTRIAL SABOTAGE .
Carefully maneuvering in the back streets, your envoy manages to infiltrate some critical city organization or defense.
In game terms, your Diplomat or Spy destroys either whatever item the rival city currently has under production, or one of the rival city’s existing improvements — the item targeted is a matter of random chance.
If you send a Spy, she has the option to try the more difficult task of destroying a specific target from the list of existing improvements that city has.
Regardless of his success, a Diplomat is lost in the effort (think mad, suicidal bombers if it helps).
If your Spy is not captured, she returns to the closest friendly city, and is promoted to veteran status for her work.
While veteran status cannot improve her ADM rating of zero defense, it does increase her chances of escaping detection on later missions.
The only way a Spy can fail to complete her sabotage is if you have opted to destroy a particular improvement.
If your envoy destroys a critical improvement, it might throw the city into unrest (Temple, Cathedral), weaken its defenses (City Walls, Coastal Fortress), or cut its production (Factory, Solar Plant).
Diplomats and Spies never destroy Wonders of the World.
INCITE A REVOLT .
Your Diplomat or Spy contacts dissidents within a city and provides the necessary means for them to overthrow their current regime.
In game terms, for a suitable payment, the city revolts and joins your civilization.
The amount needed to finance a revolt depends on the size of the city and its proximity to the enemy civilization’s capital.
If you wish to avoid an international incident, you must subvert the city by paying double the listed amount, as the dialog box warns.
Enemy capitals never agree to revolt, and neither do cities in a Democracy.
Cities with Courthouses cost twice as much to bribe.
Cities under Communism tend to remain expensive to bribe even when they are situated far from their capital.
Also, it costs less to push a city already in civil disorder into open revolt than it does to undermine a contented city.
A Diplomat is lost in a successful revolt (he stays to organize the new government).
A Spy returns to the closest friendly city if she is not captured, after appointing a new city government.
A successful Spy is promoted to veteran status.
If you don’t have enough cash to finance the project, your envoy doesn’t even attempt to incite the natives.
He or she escapes outside the city if you refuse to pay the cost.
If the overthrow is successful, all units within one square of the revolting city that belong to that rival civilization also revolt and join your regime.
All other rival units who counted that city as home are disbanded.
All existing city improvements except Temples and Cathedrals remain intact.
POISON THE WATER SUPPLY .
Only Spies can attempt to weaken the resistance of a rival city by poisoning the water supply.
In game terms, a successful attempt reduces the target city’s population by one point.
If your Spy is successful and undetected, she discards her environment suit and returns to the closest friendly city for promotion to veteran status.
PLANT NUCLEAR DEVICE .
Only Spies can attempt to plant nuclear devices in rival cities.
In game terms, this is the only way to nuke a city protected by the SDI Defense improvement.
This is the most difficult mission to accomplish, and the likelihood of capture is high.
Furthermore, there is the possibility that your Spy will be caught red-handed, causing a major international incident.
If this happens, every civilization in the world will declare war on you, appalled by your atrocity (unless you have a Fundamentalist government).
SETTLERS & ENGINEERS .
Settlers are groups of your most resourceful and adventurous citizens.
As independent pioneers, they perform two critical functions for your civilization; they found new cities and they serve as civil engineers, improving the terrain for your empire’s benefit.
After your civilization develops the Explosives advance, the Engineer unit replaces the Settlers unit on the PRODUCTION menu.
These industrial-era citizens have better training and better equipment than your basic Settlers unit.
Engineers can accomplish all the same tasks as Settlers can, and they can perform them twice as quickly.
In addition, Engineers have the unique ability to Transform formerly unimprovable terrain like Desert, Glacier, and Mountains squares.
Your civilization produces Settlers and Engineers in the same manner as it does any other unit, with one caveat.
When one of these units is completed, the population of the city that produced it is reduced by one point (one citizen on the POPULATION ROSTER), representing the emigration of these pioneers.
If a city has only one population point when it completes the task of building a Settlers or Engineer unit, the city disappears when its population is absorbed into the new unit.
This is one of the only ways to eliminate a city that is in a poor or inconvenient location.
FOUNDING NEW CITIES & INCREASING EXISTING ONES .
To found a new city, move a Settlers or Engineer unit to the desired location and press the BUILD B key, or choose BUILD NEW CITY from the ORDERS menu.
The unit disappears as the people it represents become the first population point of the new city.
The ADD TO CITY order can be used to increase the size of an existing city with less than ten population points.
Move a Settlers or Engineer unit into an existing city and press the BUILD B key or choose ADD TO CITY from the ORDERS menu.
The unit is absorbed into the city, adding one point to its population.
MAKING IMPROVEMENTS .
Settlers, and later Engineers, can make a number of agricultural and industrial improvements to your civilization’s topography.
Each task takes a certain number of turns to complete, depending on the terrain being improved.
Some improvements can only be undertaken after your civilization has acquired certain technologies.
Engineers, being better trained and equipped, can accomplish tasks twice as fast as Settlers.
Engineers are also the only units that can Transform terrain.
Teamwork makes these units work faster.
You can combine Settlers and/or Engineers to accomplish tasks more rapidly.
For example, two Settlers units work twice as rapidly as one, and three can accomplish a task in one- third the standard time.
One Settlers unit and an Engineer can also accomplish a task in one-third the standard time, since the Engineer naturally works faster than the Settlers.
There is no limit to the number of times your Settlers or Engineers can build new improvements on any given terrain square — if the changing needs of your civilization demand clearing, irrigation, reforestation, clearing, pollution clean-up (detoxification), and reforestation in succession, the land can take it.
If an option is grayed out on the ORDERS menu, that task cannot be accomplished at this time.
Perhaps undertaking another improvement will make the desired option available in the future.
For instance, a Plains square surrounded by Forest has no access to water and cannot be irrigated.
You’ll need to clear at least one of the adjacent Forests (one that shares a side with the target square) and irrigate it, before irrigation becomes available to the target square.
We’ve extracted all the variations into a table which lists the task, the shortcut key, the required advance, if any, and the terrain types which benefit from this improvement.
Full explanations of each activity appear after the table.
IRRIGATE .
Depending on the form of government employed by your civilization, irrigation can improve the agricultural production of a city’s relatively level terrain.
A suitable square can be irrigated if it shares one side with a source of water (Ocean square or terrain with a river running through it) or another irrigated square (diagonal doesn’t count).
Although your city square might be irrigated when the city is founded, it does not count as a source of water for further irrigation.
Sometimes you might find it necessary to irrigate squares to which your city has no access, in order to extend irrigation into squares the city uses.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the BUILD IRRIGATION option on the ORDERS menu or press the I key.
CLEAR .
Clearing terrain improves the movement point cost of dense terrain (although it eliminates the defensive bonus), and provides land suitable to further improvement through irrigation or reforestation.
Sometimes a terrain square might need to be cleared to allow for irrigation access, and later reforested to restore valuable resources.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the CHANGE TO GRASSLAND (sometimes CHANGE TO PLAINS) option on the ORDERS menu or press the I key.
BUILD FARM .
Planting market gardens and other high-yield farmland is the post-industrial farmer’s task.
Once your civilization has discovered the Refrigeration advance, Settlers or Engineer units can intensify the food output of irrigated land by another 50 percent in cities that build the Supermarket improvement.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the IMPROVE FARMLAND option on the ORDERS menu or press the I key.
BUILD FORTRESS .
Building Fortresses can be essential for defense of terrain that is not a city site.
Fortresses provide a defensive bonus to rural or frontier units in the same way the City Walls improvement benefits urban defensive units (see Combat for the full details).
In addition, representative governments can station troops in Fortresses that are within three squares of a friendly city without incurring a field service penalty (see Happiness & Civil Disorder for complete details).
Once your tribe has discovered the Construction advance, this option becomes available in the ORDERS menu.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the BUILD FORTRESS option or press the F key.
MINE .
Mining terrain allows full utilization of the natural resources present.
It is especially useful in special terrain like Coal and Gold.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the BUILD MINE option on the ORDERS menu or press the M key.
REFOREST .
Reforestation improves the shield production of most terrain (though it increases the movement point cost of open terrain if there is no road or railroad through the square).
Reforesting Plains and Grassland squares also improves their defensive bonus.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the CHANGE TO FOREST option on the ORDERS menu or press the M key.
CLEAN UP POLLUTION .
Detoxifying squares by cleaning up the pollution there restores the full (pre-pollution) production capacity to the affected squares.
A long-term benefit of clean-up is the reduced chance of global warming, which might otherwise occur (see Terrain & Movement for details).
Both industrial pollution and nuclear contamination can be eliminated by clean-up efforts.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the CLEAN UP POLLUTION option on the ORDERS menu or press the P key.
BUILD ROAD .
Building roads across terrain reduces the movement point cost of that square by one-third, provided that the moving unit enters from an adjacent road square.
Depending on the form of government under which you civilization operates, it can also improve the trade production of the square.
Roads are the foundations for railroads.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the BUILD ROAD option on the ORDERS menu or press the R key.
BUILD RAILROAD .
Laying track across terrain eliminates the movement point cost of that square providing the moving unit enters from an adjacent railroad square.
Railroads also increase shield production by 50 percent, rounded down.
You can only build railroads where you have already built roads.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the BUILD RAILROAD option on the ORDERS menu or press the R key.
TRANSFORM .
Modern equipment and engineering techniques allow workers to transform even the most inhospitable land into a productive terrain.
Once your civilization has discovered the Explosives advance, this option becomes available to your Engineer units.
When your Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the TRANSFORM option on the ORDERS menu or press the O key.
BUILD AIRBASE .
Building rural airbases allows your air units more flexibility in their flight plans and enables them to patrol a greater area.
Once your civilization has discovered the Radio advance, this option becomes available on the ORDER menu.
When your Settlers or Engineer unit is positioned in the appropriate terrain square, choose the BUILD AIRBASE option or press the E key.
EXPLORERS .
Explorers are non-combat units that can treat all terrain as roads.
Their bravery and resourcefulness makes them ideal for opening up new continents and discovering the far reaches of a landmass quickly.
Explorers can ignore enemy units’ zones of control; however, for diplomatic purposes (peace treaties and alliances) your rivals consider Explorers as dangerous as they do combat units.
BARBARIANS .
Barbarians are small tribes of raiders that are not part of any opposing civilization.
They always carry red shields.
You can set the likelihood and frequency of barbarian attacks in the initial game choices you make.
You might encounter them periodically as your civilization begins to expand and grow.
They sometimes invade from the sea; other times they arise suddenly in unsettled parts of any continent.
Barbarians might attempt to capture or destroy your cities, and pillage your fields and mines.
Most barbarian tribes are accompanied by a leader.
Because barbarians can appear along any coast or in any unsettled area, it is important to defend your cities with at least one military unit.
Barbarians (and rival armies) can walk right into an undefended city, capturing it with only minor bloodshed (the captured city loses one population point, just as any city taken by force does — see Capturing Cities under Cities for the gory details).
Even if barbarians capture a city or several cities, they do not become a rival civilization — that is, they do not join the space race, or negotiate treaties, or earn rank in historians’ reckonings.
Sea raiders can be fought on land or engaged at sea in their ships.
Land barbarians arise in areas that are outside the radius of a city.
As time passes, they appear at even farther distances from civilization.
Thus, expanding your network of cities over a continent eventually removes the threat of land barbarians, because the entire area has become more or less civilized by your urban presence.
RANSOMING BARBARIAN LEADERS .
When you attack and destroy stacked barbarian units, the leader units fall with their troops and are also destroyed.
However, if a barbarian leader stands alone in a square, and your army wins an attack against him, he is captured.
His compatriots immediately give you gold to ransom him back — the amount they pay is based on the barbarian level you chose in game setup.
Barbarian leaders who have lost their armies attempt to escape.
If not captured in a few turns, they disappear.
Diplomacy .
Other cultures share your world in Civilization II.
If your attitude is expansionist and your home continent is large, you might seek out — and find — your rivals early in the game.
If you concentrate on perfecting your own cities or find yourself limited by a small continent, it might be centuries before you encounter other players.
Whether you opt for peaceful communications or aggressive action depends on your style.
CONCEPTS OF DIPLOMACY .
Eventually, no matter how isolated your location or how isolationist your policies, you will have contact with rival civilizations.
Choosing to meet with a rival allows you to explore the intricacies of negotiation.
Every AI opponent has an attitude that he or she presents to negotiators.
Your rivals’ attitudes can range from friendly to inimical.
You can tell what attitude a leader has by watching the body language of the emissary after he or she stops speaking and by observing the titles of the dialog boxes during negotiations.
A ruler’s personality affects his or her attitude.
Your rivals’ attitudes can change over time, depending on your rank in the game, the current balance of power, the gifts you offer them, and your reputation for keeping your word in negotiations: Every time you go back on your word, international observers notice and remember.
Diplomatic negotiations can result in five different states: alliance, peace, cease-fire, neutrality or war.
A rival might demand money or civilization advances (the reverse is also true — you can demand money or civilization advances from rival rulers).
In addition, negotiations can include requests to share maps and instructions to withdraw trespassing troops.
A player might even ask you to declare war on a third party.
All negotiations progress through a series of screens, each with a variety of pre-set options.
Establishing embassies in your rivals’ cities allows you to increase your negotiating power.
By checking your FOREIGN MINISTER’s reports, you can see whether, for example, the bellicose Indians have the city base to back up their threats, or whether they are just bluffing.
You’ll have a better idea of when to back down and when to press for concessions.
CONDUCTING DIPLOMACY WITH COMPUTER OPPONENTS .
Diplomacy is conducted face to face with one rival emissary at a time.
An opponent can contact you any time after units from each of your civilizations have met, and the reverse is also true.
You can contact an opponent any time after your units have been adjacent to his or hers.
Just select the SEND EMISSARY option from the FOREIGN MINISTER’s report in the ADVISORS menu.
In game terms, once you choose the SEND EMISSARY option, a dialog box opens, offering you several responses from which to select your intent.
The form of government under which your civilization currently operates can influence the choices you have; see Governments for the details. Establishing embassies with other civilizations can be a very useful preparation for negotiations.
Your FOREIGN MINISTER collects information from all of your embassies.
From him you can learn important facts about your opponents, including the personalities of their leaders, their diplomatic states with respect to all civilizations with whom they have contact, the number and names of their cities, the extent of their technological advances, their current research project, and the amount in their treasury.
This information is not available for civilizations with which you have not established an embassy.
MOOD AND PERSONALITY .
The tone and result of any negotiations are greatly influenced by the mood of your rival.
The opposing leader might be antagonistic, obsequious, or somewhere in between.
This mood depends on the leader’s personality and how your two civilizations compare to each other and to the rest of the world.
You might pick up cues about a rival’s mood from the body language of the emissary.
A rival leader’s personality might be aggressive, rational or neutral.
Aggressive leaders are more likely to lean toward war or demand high payments for peace.
Rational leaders are more likely to offer peace and might only be bluffing when asking for payment.
If you have broken previous peace agreements with any civilization, your perfidy is remembered and influences all rivals’ degree of antagonism.
If you are the largest, most powerful, and richest civilization in the world, all rivals are likely to be very demanding or antagonistic.
However, if a particular opponent is puny in comparison to your might, his or her natural tendency to belligerence might be overridden.
A civilization threatened with extinction is more interested in survival.
Leaders with whom you are allied tend to become jealous as your civilization grows larger and more powerful; they expect to be appeased with gifts of cash or knowledge.
On the other hand, allies who leap ahead of you may be generous when asked to share their good fortune.
REPUTATION .
Your reputation is based not on how peaceful or how warlike you are toward your neighbors, but on how often you keep your word.
Breaking alliances or treaties can blacken your reputation in the international community.
Savagely sacking the city of a treaty partner with Legions, or breaking a cease-fire to bombard your opponent’s city by Stealth Bomber are acts likely to be deplored throughout the known world.
The actions of your Diplomats and Spies can also damage your standing.
Your computer opponents learn from your actions and adjust theirs to fit their expectations.
If you habitually break treaties, other leaders will have no qualms about doing the same to you.
It is important to note that the most severe censure is reserved for the ringleaders in group actions.
If you break your word because you were “incited” by another player, the diplomatic penalty is drastically reduced.
For example, if you have signed a treaty with the Romans, and the Greek emissary asks you to declare war on your erstwhile friends, it is a chance for you to break your treaty with the Romans at a much- lessened penalty than if you had been the principle figure of treachery.
Over long periods of time, if you mend your ways by keeping your word to other rulers, the black marks on your reputation can be partially erased and your honor somewhat redeemed.
If you build the Eiffel Tower Wonder, the process of character redemption is speeded by a “lump sum” 25 percent shift in your favor, followed by a more rapid recovery over time.
Only through the effect of the Eiffel Tower can a player who has broken his word regain a spotless reputation.
Finally, your reputation matters on the domestic front, too.
When you choose to govern your civilization as a Republic or Democracy, your Senate pays careful attention to your conduct in foreign affairs.
They can, for instance, force you to sign a cease-fire or peace agreement.
They are also vigilant in trying to force you to keep your agreements.
If they catch you circumventing their oversight by intentionally provoking an enemy (by refusing to leave enemy territory during a peace treaty, for instance, or if a Diplomat or Spy causes an international incident), your government is likely to collapse into Anarchy because of the scandal.
THE FIVE DIPLOMATIC STATES .
In Civilization, all negotiations ended with an offer of peace or a declaration of war.
In Civilization II, however, there are finer gradations of posture, or diplomatic state, than just these two options.
The relationship between two cultures can be expressed as one of five different states: alliance, peace, cease-fire, neutrality, or war.
Each has repercussions in the movement and position of armies and other units, as well as on the international reputation of the participants.
A short description of each state follows.
ALLIANCE .
In an alliance, you and your ally agree to full (or almost full) cooperation against your common enemies.
This shared purpose and trust manifests in a relaxation of restrictions.
You can freely enter each others’ territories, ignoring zones of control, although you cannot stack your units with those of your ally or actually enter each others’ city spaces.
If you have convinced a weaker power to ally with you, that ruler will expect occasional awards for his or her faithful service.
Your ally also expects your military assistance if he or she is attacked.
Because an alliance involves a great deal of trust and cooperation, it is more difficult to cancel than other types of agreement.
You cannot simply back-stab an ally by attacking him or her, but must first cancel your agreement during diplomatic negotiations.
All units nearer to one of your former ally’s cities than to one of your own are returned from the field to the closest friendly city.
The reverse is also true: your former ally’s armies are returned to his or her territory at the same time.
Breaking an alliance, for any reason, is remembered as a major transgression by all of the computer-controlled players.
If you unilaterally cancel an alliance, your reputation suffers a “black mark” that is only very slowly erased by time.
To cancel an alliance without receiving a black mark, you must maneuver your ally into terminating the agreement for you.
PEACE .
A peace treaty is in theory a permanent arrangement, in which you and your rival agree not to attack each other or even enter the other’s territory with military units.
In Civilization II a ruler’s territory encompasses any space within the radii of his or her cities.
Units that violate this agreement may be asked to leave — and their failure to do so immediately can be considered a treaty violation, even if circumstances (like opposing units’ zones of control) render the trespassing unit temporarily immobile.
Since it is a degree less cooperative than an alliance, there is no barrier that prevents you from breaking a peace treaty at any time — other than your concern for your reputation.
Breaking a peace treaty is a serious matter, and your ruthlessness is long remembered by all other cultures, not merely the one you double-crossed.
If you wish to avoid the black mark on your reputation, you can try taunting the other leader into declaring war on you.
If he or she falls for the maneuver, you reputation remains spotless, though your military preparedness might suffer as your armies absorb his or her first strike.
Peace treaties are most useful when you want a long period of quiet on a particular border, since their recognition of territorial borders keeps enemy units from harassing you and fortifying near your cities.
By the same token, they impede you from entrenching your units in your treaty-partner’s territory.
CEASE-FIRE .
A cease-fire is an agreement with a former enemy to end a war.
Your enemy might agree to a cease-fire because he or she wants to make peace, is tired of fighting, or simply wants to get some breathing space before attacking you again.
Once a cease-fire is signed, your former enemy ceases attacking your units and cities for approximately 16 turns.
Although a cease-fire enjoins you from attacking your former enemy, there are no territorial restrictions on where you may move your units — you can remain in your fortified positions, even adjacent to enemy cities.
Of course, maintaining military units near enemy cities is considered a sign of bad faith and will lead to friction in the future.
Unlike a peace treaty, a cease-fire is only a temporary agreement whose effects dwindle with time.
Once the cease-fire expires, your civilizations remain in a state of neutrality (described below) until some other negotiation or aggression takes place.
A cease-fire is automatically extended for an additional 16 turns or so whenever tribute is paid by either side.
A message informs you when a cease-fire you have signed expires.
Violating a cease- fire is an act of treachery that is remembered internationally, and that blackens your reputation.
NEUTRALITY .
This state represents not so much an agreement as a wary agreement to disagree — you are not openly at war with an enemy, but you have no formal connection, either.
The lack of binding paperwork means that you can freely start a war at any time simply by attacking an enemy unit or city.
On the other hand, you might also send an emissary to start negotiating a peace treaty or even an alliance with a neutral rival.
Territory is considered important while cultures maintain a neutral stance, and refusing to remove a unit that has entered the opponent’s territory might be enough provocation for a declaration of war.
The expulsion of your Diplomat or Spy from an opponent’s territory is not in itself a contravention of neutrality.
WAR .
This diplomatic state represents the likelihood of open hostilities at any point in which your units contact your opponent’s units.
However, there are times when you might enter or remain in a state of war without the exchange of gunfire, as when continents separate your main forces from the enemy’s.
Wars can start for innumerable reasons, ranging from self defense to greed and conquest.
War might be openly declared after a breakdown in negotiations or in return for offenses rendered by ill-placed troops, or it can start with a sudden sneak attack.
Civilizations at war with yours might drag their neighbors into the conflict, too, by activating alliances (paying their allies to assist them in the attack).
Once you are at war with another civilization, that ruler considers you a hated enemy unless and until you sign a cease-fire or other, more permanent, agreement.
You must make up separately with each opponent (even those allied with a civilization with whom you have already negotiated).
If, for instance, the Vikings and the Sioux were allies in a war against you, you must negotiate one agreement to end hostilities with the Vikings and a separate one to placate the Sioux.
NEGOTIATIONS .
To begin negotiations with another ruler, simply pull down the FOREIGN MINISTER’s report from the ADVISOR menu, and click the SEND EMISSARY button.
The options available to you depend on your current diplomatic state and the attitude of your rival.
If you send too many emissaries, a leader can get annoyed and refuse to speak to you.
Wait a few turns for his or her impatience to wear off, then try again.
If you are at war with a rival, he or she might make a demand that you must satisfy if you wish to progress in your negotiations or might even refuse to meet with you.
If you are in a state of neutrality or better and have not exhausted your welcome, you progress to the DIPLOMACY menu.
Again, the options available to you depend on your current diplomatic state.
We’ve prepared several tables to clarify your choices.
The table below displays the gist of your emissary’s polished phrases, the states in which he or she is allowed to offer such remarks, and the opponent’s probable response.
Most results are self explanatory; the two which direct you to other menus are expanded on below.
“HAVE A PROPOSAL TO MAKE...”
Once you have your rival’s ear, you can make a variety of suggestions.
Common sense tells you that the better an opponent likes you, the more likely he or she is to agree to your proposal.
Opponents also take your relative standing in the game into account.
They are more likely to be magnanimous if you are far behind than if you are the pre-eminent power in the world.
The following table gives the gist of your emissary’s remarks and the rival’s likely response.
Exchanging Knowledge: Civilizations that are not extremely antagonistic might accept an offer to trade civilization advances.
They negotiate by requesting a particular advance from you.
Your options include accepting the deal as offered, vetoing the exchange, or offering an alternative advance instead of the one they requested.
They, in turn, can accept or decline your revised offer.
Sometimes an opponent thinks less of you for offering lesser alternatives.
You may continue trading as many technologies as you possess, provided the other party is interested.
Occasionally, you might be offered an advance as a gift or for a monetary fee.
Declaring War: Civilizations who see an advantage in changing the balance of power might be persuaded to declare war on a mutual enemy.
They usually request a cash payment for their trouble, but might demand two advances in lieu of gold.
Exchanging Maps: Civilizations might agree to exchange knowledge of the world in the form of accurate maps of territory they have explored.
If they accept, the darkness is rolled back in your MAP window to represent their information.
“HAVE A GIFT TO OFFER...”
Sometimes rivals appreciate a tangible result more than mere flowery words.
If you’d like to improve an opponent’s attitude toward you, you have the option of offering a gift.
Several categories of persuasion are available: knowledge, money, and troops.
Offer Knowledge: You can agree to offer knowledge to cement a better relationship.
Your rival suggests an advance they are interested in.
You can agree to that choice, change your mind about the exchange, or make a counter-offer.
Your rival’s opinion of you improves with each gift you make.
Offer Money: You can attempt to offer a gift of cash to placate your rival.
A dialog box lists your three levels of generosity.
If you change your mind, the NEVER MIND option is always available.
Your rival’s opinion of you always climbs if you give him or her gold.
Offer Military Unit: You can attempt to offer one of your existing military units to bolster a friend’s army and encourage his or her good opinion.
If the leader feels your technology is superior, a list of your cities appears.
Choose one to see the roster of units stationed there.
Click on a unit to send.
That unit becomes part of the other civilization’s army, and no longer draws support from your city.
Winning the Game .
As we explained in the Introduction, there are two ways to win Civilization II.
You can either beat the other civilizations into space by being the first to successfully colonize a distant system, or conquer all the other civilizations in the game.
THE SPACE RACE .
The environmental pressures of growing populations in the modern world are forcing humans to look into space for resources and room to live.
The question is not whether humans will travel to the stars, but when.
The final act of stewardship you can perform for your civilization is to ensure that they lead this exodus.
The history of your civilization ends when either you or one of your rivals reaches a nearby star system with colonists.
If your spaceship is the first to arrive, you receive a bonus to your civilization score in recognition of this final accomplishment.
Regardless of how many colonists your spaceship is carrying or how fast it is, if a rival makes planetfall first, you receive no bonus.
No civilization can undertake spaceship component construction until one civilization has built the Apollo Program Wonder.
Thereafter, the race is on and any civilization that has acquired the necessary advances can begin building the parts of a spaceship.
Spaceships are in many ways a one-shot deal.
Each civilization, including yours, can build only one spaceship at a time.
Restrictions prevent you from building a second, back- up ship once you launch the first.
Once launched, ships cannot be recalled or turned around.
You can construct a second spaceship only if your current ship explodes in space or if your capital city is captured while your spaceship is under construction (the conquerors burn it on the launch pad).
SPACESHIPS .
The purpose of your spaceship is to carry as many colonists as possible to another star system.
At a minimum, it must provide living space for colonists, life support, energy sources, propulsion power, and fuel for the engines.
Spending more time constructing additional components can result in a faster voyage and a higher colonist survival rate.
As each new component is completed, the SPACESHIP display appears, showing where the component is positioned and updating the statistics and specifications.
All spaceships have the same characteristics: population, food, energy, mass, fuel, flight time, and probability of success.
We’ll explain each in turn.
POPULATION .
This figure represents the number of pioneers the spaceship is outfitted to carry.
The more citizens it carries to the new planet, the higher your bonus.
SUPPORT .
This figure shows what percentage of accommodations on the ship is currently serviced by life support: air, nutrient, and waste systems.
Pioneers not provided with life support cannot survive the voyage.
ENERGY .
This figure indicates what percentage of the energy required by habitation and life support modules is currently being provided.
If sufficient energy is not available to power life support and habitation, the probability of success will be very low.
MASS .
All of the components, modules, and structures add to the mass of your spaceship.
The greater the mass, the more power is required from propulsion parts to move it.
FUEL .
This figure indicates what percentage of the fuel your propulsion units require is currently aboard.
If insufficient fuel is provided, the propulsion components aboard cannot work to their maximum power and the ship cannot attain its best possible speed.
FLIGHT TIME .
This calculation indicates the number of years required for your spaceship to reach the nearest star, based on the ship’s current mass and engine power.
Adding more engines and fuel reduces flight time.
PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS .
This figure incorporates all the other data (including the amount of food and energy available and the estimated flight time) in an estimate of the approximate percentage of colonists who are expected to survive the voyage.
The faster the flight, the higher the expected survival rate.
SPACE SHIP LAUNCH .
To send your spaceship on its voyage, click on the LAUNCH button.
You cannot retrieve a spaceship once it has been launched.
CONSTRUCTION .
Your spaceship is such a large undertaking that it cannot be built whole cloth the way improvements are built — it is, instead, constructed of parts.
There are three types of spaceship parts: components, modules, and structures, each of which we describe in detail below.
You must achieve a new civilization advance to make each type of part available for construction.
However, the delivery of spaceship parts to your capital city is handled automatically as each part is completed.
Though you can construct parts in any order, and most likely will have multiple parts under production simultaneously, all modules and components must eventually be connected to structural parts if you want them to function.
Unconnected modules or components are emphasized to signal that they are not working.
Once sufficient structural parts have been added to provide supply and support lines, the problem disappears.
COMPONENTS .
To build spaceship components you must have achieved the technological advance of PLASTICS.
You can then build components at a cost of 160 shields each.
There are two kinds of components, propulsion and fuel.
As each component is completed, you choose which type has been built.
Propulsion Components: These parts are the engines that provide the power for space flight.
More engines mean the ship travels faster, reaches its destination sooner, and has a higher probability of a successful mission.
Fuel Components: These parts provide fuel for the propulsion units.
In order for the propulsion units to perform at maximum levels, you must provide one fuel component for each propulsion component.
MODULES .
Spaceship modules require the advance of Superconductor and cost 320 shields each to build.
They exist in three types: habitation, life support, and solar panels.
As each module is completed, you choose which type it is and add it to your ship.
Habitation Module: Each habitation module provides living space, community services, and recreational facilities for 10,000 colonists.
Life Support Module: Each life support module provides the food and other requirements for the 10,000 colonists carried in one habitation module.
Colonists carried in a habitation module that doesn’t receive life support have a very low probability of surviving.
Solar Panel Module: Each solar panel module provides enough energy to power two of the other types of module.
Modules that don’t receive power cannot function properly.
STRUCTURAL SUPPORT .
Structural units require the advance of Space Flight and cost 80 shields each to build.
You must build sufficient structural units to connect the components and modules together.
Parts that are not connected do not work and provide no benefit to the ship.
CONQUERING THE WORLD .
When striving to win this way, aggressiveness helps.
Your object is to take over any and all rival civilizations.
Note that if you vanquish other civilizations early enough in the game, some new tribe might develop a Settlers unit and found a civilization using the color originally assigned to the vanquished culture.
In this way, some civilizations “re-start.”
Eventually, if you’re lucky, you might be able to subjugate the entire world.
If at any time you control the only settled civilization, you win, and the End Game sequence proclaims you the ruler of the world.
